CREATE
<note>
  <guid>D024D279-FBDF-4490-A977-6AC4C84B3B05</guid>
  <created>2014-01-29T14:49:42Z</created>
  <tag>fiction</tag>
  <tag>novel</tag>
  <tag>oz</tag>
  <tag>baum</tag>
  <tag>wizard</tag>
  <tag>adventure</tag>
  <content>
    Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz


      A Faithful Record of Their Amazing Adventures
        in an Underground World; and How with the
         Aid of Their Friends Zeb Hugson, Eureka
           the Kitten, and Jim the Cab-Horse,
                They Finally Reached the
                    Wonderful Land
                        of Oz


    by

    L. Frank Baum

    "Royal Historian of Oz"




        - To My Readers -
       1.  The Earthquake
       2.  The Glass City
       3.  The Arrival of the Wizard
       4.  The Vegetable Kingdom
       5.  Dorothy Picks the Princess
       6.  The Mangaboos Prove Dangerous
       7.  Into the Black Pit and Out Again
       8.  The Valley of Voices
       9.  They Fight the Invisible Bears
      10.  The Braided Man of Pyramid Mountain
      11.  They Meet the Wooden Gargoyles
      12.  A Wonderful Escape
      13.  The Den of the Dragonettes
      14.  Ozma Uses the Magic Belt
      15.  Old Friends are Reunited
      16.  Jim, the Cab-Horse
      17.  The Nine Tiny Piglets
      18.  The Trial of Eureka, the Kitten
      19.  The Wizard Performs Another Trick
      20.  Zeb Returns to the Ranch




    To My Readers


    It's no use; no use at all.  The children won't let me stop telling
    tales of the Land of Oz.  I know lots of other stories, and I hope to
    tell them, some time or another; but just now my loving tyrants won't
    allow me.  They cry: "Oz - Oz! more about Oz, Mr. Baum!" and what can I
    do but obey their commands?

    This is Our Book - mine and the children's.  For they have flooded me
    with thousands of suggestions in regard to it, and I have honestly
    tried to adopt as many of these suggestions as could be fitted into one
    story.

    After the wonderful success of "Ozma of Oz" it is evident that Dorothy
    has become a firm fixture in these Oz stories.  The little ones all
    love Dorothy, and as one of my small friends aptly states: "It isn't a
    real Oz story without her."  So here she is again, as sweet and gentle
    and innocent as ever, I hope, and the heroine of another strange
    adventure.

    There were many requests from my little correspondents for "more about
    the Wizard."  It seems the jolly old fellow made hosts of friends in
    the first Oz book, in spite of the fact that he frankly acknowledged
    himself "a humbug."  The children had heard how he mounted into the sky
    in a balloon and they were all waiting for him to come down again.  So
    what could I do but tell "what happened to the Wizard afterward"?  You
    will find him in these pages, just the same humbug Wizard as before.

    There was one thing the children demanded which I found it impossible
    to do in this present book: they bade me introduce Toto, Dorothy's
    little black dog, who has many friends among my readers.  But you will
    see, when you begin to read the story, that Toto was in Kansas while
    Dorothy was in California, and so she had to start on her adventure
    without him.  In this book Dorothy had to take her kitten with her
    instead of her dog; but in the next Oz book, if I am permitted to write
    one, I intend to tell a good deal about Toto's further history.

    Princess Ozma, whom I love as much as my readers do, is again
    introduced in this story, and so are several of our old friends of Oz.
    You will also become acquainted with Jim the Cab-Horse, the Nine Tiny
    Piglets, and Eureka, the Kitten.  I am sorry the kitten was not as well
    behaved as she ought to have been; but perhaps she wasn't brought up
    properly.  Dorothy found her, you see, and who her parents were nobody
    knows.

    I believe, my dears, that I am the proudest story-teller that ever
    lived.  Many a time tears of pride and joy have stood in my eyes while
    I read the tender, loving, appealing letters that came to me in almost
    every mail from my little readers.  To have pleased you, to have
    interested you, to have won your friendship, and perhaps your love,
    through my stories, is to my mind as great an achievement as to become
    President of the United States.  Indeed, I would much rather be your
    story-teller, under these conditions, than to be the President.  So you
    have helped me to fulfill my life's ambition, and I am more grateful to
    you, my dears, than I can express in words.

    I try to answer every letter of my young correspondents; yet sometimes
    there are so many letters that a little time must pass before you get
    your answer.  But be patient, friends, for the answer will surely come,
    and by writing to me you more than repay me for the pleasant task of
    preparing these books.  Besides, I am proud to acknowledge that the
    books are partly yours, for your suggestions often guide me in telling
    the stories, and I am sure they would not be half so good without your
    clever and thoughtful assistance.

    L. FRANK BAUM

    Coronado, 1908.




    1.  The Earthquake


    The train from 'Frisco was very late.  It should have arrived at
    Hugson's Siding at midnight, but it was already five o'clock and the
    gray dawn was breaking in the east when the little train slowly rumbled
    up to the open shed that served for the station-house.  As it came to a
    stop the conductor called out in a loud voice:

    "Hugson's Siding!"

    At once a little girl rose from her seat and walked to the door of the
    car, carrying a wicker suit-case in one hand and a round bird-cage
    covered up with newspapers in the other, while a parasol was tucked
    under her arm.  The conductor helped her off the car and then the
    engineer started his train again, so that it puffed and groaned and
    moved slowly away up the track.  The reason he was so late was because
    all through the night there were times when the solid earth shook and
    trembled under him, and the engineer was afraid that at any moment the
    rails might spread apart and an accident happen to his passengers.  So
    he moved the cars slowly and with caution.

    The little girl stood still to watch until the train had disappeared
    around a curve; then she turned to see where she was.

    The shed at Hugson's Siding was bare save for an old wooden bench, and
    did not look very inviting.  As she peered through the soft gray light
    not a house of any sort was visible near the station, nor was any
    person in sight; but after a while the child discovered a horse and
    buggy standing near a group of trees a short distance away.  She walked
    toward it and found the horse tied to a tree and standing motionless,
    with its head hanging down almost to the ground.  It was a big horse,
    tall and bony, with long legs and large knees and feet.  She could
    count his ribs easily where they showed through the skin of his body,
    and his head was long and seemed altogether too big for him, as if it
    did not fit.  His tail was short and scraggly, and his harness had been
    broken in many places and fastened together again with cords and bits
    of wire.  The buggy seemed almost new, for it had a shiny top and side
    curtains.  Getting around in front, so that she could look inside, the
    girl saw a boy curled up on the seat, fast asleep.

    She set down the bird-cage and poked the boy with her parasol.
    Presently he woke up, rose to a sitting position and rubbed his eyes
    briskly.

    "Hello!" he said, seeing her, "are you Dorothy Gale?"

    "Yes," she answered, looking gravely at his tousled hair and blinking
    gray eyes.  "Have you come to take me to Hugson's Ranch?"

    "Of course," he answered.  "Train in?"

    "I couldn't be here if it wasn't," she said.

    He laughed at that, and his laugh was merry and frank.  Jumping out of
    the buggy he put Dorothy's suit-case under the seat and her bird-cage
    on the floor in front.

    "Canary-birds?" he asked.

    "Oh no; it's just Eureka, my kitten.  I thought that was the best way
    to carry her."

    The boy nodded.

    "Eureka's a funny name for a cat," he remarked.

    "I named my kitten that because I found it," she explained.  "Uncle
    Henry says 'Eureka' means 'I have found it.'"

    "All right; hop in."

    She climbed into the buggy and he followed her.  Then the boy picked up
    the reins, shook them, and said "Gid-dap!"

    The horse did not stir.  Dorothy thought he just wiggled one of his
    drooping ears, but that was all.

    "Gid-dap!" called the boy, again.

    The horse stood still.

    "Perhaps," said Dorothy, "if you untied him, he would go."

    The boy laughed cheerfully and jumped out.

    "Guess I'm half asleep yet," he said, untying the horse.  "But Jim
    knows his business all right - don't you, Jim?" patting the long nose of
    the animal.

    Then he got into the buggy again and took the reins, and the horse at
    once backed away from the tree, turned slowly around, and began to trot
    down the sandy road which was just visible in the dim light.

    "Thought that train would never come," observed the boy.  "I've waited
    at that station for five hours."

    "We had a lot of earthquakes," said Dorothy.  "Didn't you feel the
    ground shake?"

    "Yes; but we're used to such things in California," he replied.  "They
    don't scare us much."

    "The conductor said it was the worst quake he ever knew."

    "Did he?  Then it must have happened while I was asleep," he said
    thoughtfully.

    "How is Uncle Henry?" she enquired, after a pause during which the
    horse continued to trot with long, regular strides.

    "He's pretty well.  He and Uncle Hugson have been having a fine visit."

    "Is Mr. Hugson your uncle?" she asked.

    "Yes.  Uncle Bill Hugson married your Uncle Henry's wife's sister; so
    we must be second cousins," said the boy, in an amused tone.  "I work
    for Uncle Bill on his ranch, and he pays me six dollars a month and my
    board."

    "Isn't that a great deal?" she asked, doubtfully.

    "Why, it's a great deal for Uncle Hugson, but not for me.  I'm a
    splendid worker.  I work as well as I sleep," he added, with a laugh.

    "What is your name?" said Dorothy, thinking she liked the boy's manner
    and the cheery tone of his voice.

    "Not a very pretty one," he answered, as if a little ashamed.  "My
    whole name is Zebediah; but folks just call me 'Zeb.'  You've been to
    Australia, haven't you?"

    "Yes; with Uncle Henry," she answered.  "We got to San Francisco a week
    ago, and Uncle Henry went right on to Hugson's Ranch for a visit while
    I stayed a few days in the city with some friends we had met."

    "How long will you be with us?" he asked.

    "Only a day.  Tomorrow Uncle Henry and I must start back for Kansas.
    We've been away for a long time, you know, and so we're anxious to get
    home again."

    The boy flicked the big, boney horse with his whip and looked
    thoughtful.  Then he started to say something to his little companion,
    but before he could speak the buggy began to sway dangerously from side
    to side and the earth seemed to rise up before them.  Next minute there
    was a roar and a sharp crash, and at her side Dorothy saw the ground
    open in a wide crack and then come together again.

    "Goodness!" she cried, grasping the iron rail of the seat.  "What was
    that?"

    "That was an awful big quake," replied Zeb, with a white face.  "It
    almost got us that time, Dorothy."

    The horse had stopped short, and stood firm as a rock.  Zeb shook the
    reins and urged him to go, but Jim was stubborn.  Then the boy cracked
    his whip and touched the animal's flanks with it, and after a low moan
    of protest Jim stepped slowly along the road.

    Neither the boy nor the girl spoke again for some minutes.  There was a
    breath of danger in the very air, and every few moments the earth would
    shake violently.  Jim's ears were standing erect upon his head and
    every muscle of his big body was tense as he trotted toward home.  He
    was not going very fast, but on his flanks specks of foam began to
    appear and at times he would tremble like a leaf.

    The sky had grown darker again and the wind made queer sobbing sounds
    as it swept over the valley.

    Suddenly there was a rending, tearing sound, and the earth split into
    another great crack just beneath the spot where the horse was standing.
    With a wild neigh of terror the animal fell bodily into the pit,
    drawing the buggy and its occupants after him.

    Dorothy grabbed fast hold of the buggy top and the boy did the same.
    The sudden rush into space confused them so that they could not think.

    Blackness engulfed them on every side, and in breathless silence they
    waited for the fall to end and crush them against jagged rocks or for
    the earth to close in on them again and bury them forever in its
    dreadful depths.

    The horrible sensation of falling, the darkness and the terrifying
    noises, proved more than Dorothy could endure and for a few moments the
    little girl lost consciousness.  Zeb, being a boy, did not faint, but
    he was badly frightened, and clung to the buggy seat with a tight grip,
    expecting every moment would be his last.




    2.  The Glass City


    When Dorothy recovered her senses they were still falling, but not so
    fast.  The top of the buggy caught the air like a parachute or an
    umbrella filled with wind, and held them back so that they floated
    downward with a gentle motion that was not so very disagreeable to
    bear.  The worst thing was their terror of reaching the bottom of this
    great crack in the earth, and the natural fear that sudden death was
    about to overtake them at any moment.  Crash after crash echoed far
    above their heads, as the earth came together where it had split, and
    stones and chunks of clay rattled around them on every side.  These
    they could not see, but they could feel them pelting the buggy top, and
    Jim screamed almost like a human being when a stone overtook him and
    struck his boney body.  They did not really hurt the poor horse,
    because everything was falling together; only the stones and rubbish
    fell faster than the horse and buggy, which were held back by the
    pressure of the air, so that the terrified animal was actually more
    frightened than he was injured.

    How long this state of things continued Dorothy could not even guess,
    she was so greatly bewildered.  But bye and bye, as she stared ahead
    into the black chasm with a beating heart, she began to dimly see the
    form of the horse Jim - his head up in the air, his ears erect and his
    long legs sprawling in every direction as he tumbled through space.
    Also, turning her head, she found that she could see the boy beside
    her, who had until now remained as still and silent as she herself.

    Dorothy sighed and commenced to breathe easier.  She began to realize
    that death was not in store for her, after all, but that she had merely
    started upon another adventure, which promised to be just as queer and
    unusual as were those she had before encountered.

    With this thought in mind the girl took heart and leaned her head over
    the side of the buggy to see where the strange light was coming from.
    Far below her she found six great glowing balls suspended in the air.
    The central and largest one was white, and reminded her of the sun.
    Around it were arranged, like the five points of a star, the other five
    brilliant balls; one being rose colored, one violet, one yellow, one
    blue and one orange.  This splendid group of colored suns sent rays
    darting in every direction, and as the horse and buggy - with Dorothy
    and Zeb - sank steadily downward and came nearer to the lights, the rays
    began to take on all the delicate tintings of a rainbow, growing more
    and more distinct every moment until all the space was brilliantly
    illuminated.

    Dorothy was too dazed to say much, but she watched one of Jim's big
    ears turn to violet and the other to rose, and wondered that his tail
    should be yellow and his body striped with blue and orange like the
    stripes of a zebra.  Then she looked at Zeb, whose face was blue and
    whose hair was pink, and gave a little laugh that sounded a bit nervous.

    "Isn't it funny?" she said.

    The boy was startled and his eyes were big.  Dorothy had a green streak
    through the center of her face where the blue and yellow lights came
    together, and her appearance seemed to add to his fright.

    "I - I don't s-s-see any-thing funny - 'bout it!" he stammered.

    Just then the buggy tipped slowly over upon its side, the body of the
    horse tipping also.  But they continued to fall, all together, and the
    boy and girl had no difficulty in remaining upon the seat, just as they
    were before.  Then they turned bottom side up, and continued to roll
    slowly over until they were right side up again.  During this time Jim
    struggled frantically, all his legs kicking the air; but on finding
    himself in his former position the horse said, in a relieved tone of
    voice:

    "Well, that's better!"

    Dorothy and Zeb looked at one another in wonder.

    "Can your horse talk?" she asked.

    "Never knew him to, before," replied the boy.

    "Those were the first words I ever said," called out the horse, who had
    overheard them, "and I can't explain why I happened to speak then.
    This is a nice scrape you've got me into, isn't it?"

    "As for that, we are in the same scrape ourselves," answered Dorothy,
    cheerfully.  "But never mind; something will happen pretty soon."

    "Of course," growled the horse, "and then we shall be sorry it
    happened."

    Zeb gave a shiver.  All this was so terrible and unreal that he could
    not understand it at all, and so had good reason to be afraid.

    Swiftly they drew near to the flaming colored suns, and passed close
    beside them.  The light was then so bright that it dazzled their eyes,
    and they covered their faces with their hands to escape being blinded.
    There was no heat in the colored suns, however, and after they had
    passed below them the top of the buggy shut out many of the piercing
    rays so that the boy and girl could open their eyes again.

    "We've got to come to the bottom some time," remarked Zeb, with a deep
    sigh.  "We can't keep falling forever, you know."

    "Of course not," said Dorothy.  "We are somewhere in the middle of the
    earth, and the chances are we'll reach the other side of it before
    long.  But it's a big hollow, isn't it?"

    "Awful big!" answered the boy.

    "We're coming to something now," announced the horse.

    At this they both put their heads over the side of the buggy and looked
    down.  Yes; there was land below them; and not so very far away,
    either.  But they were floating very, very slowly - so slowly that it
    could no longer be called a fall - and the children had ample time to
    take heart and look about them.

    They saw a landscape with mountains and plains, lakes and rivers, very
    like those upon the earth's surface; but all the scene was splendidly
    colored by the variegated lights from the six suns.  Here and there
    were groups of houses that seemed made of clear glass, because they
    sparkled so brightly.

    "I'm sure we are in no danger," said Dorothy, in a sober voice.  "We
    are falling so slowly that we can't be dashed to pieces when we land,
    and this country that we are coming to seems quite pretty."

    "We'll never get home again, though!" declared Zeb, with a groan.

    "Oh, I'm not so sure of that," replied the girl.  "But don't let us
    worry over such things, Zeb; we can't help ourselves just now, you
    know, and I've always been told it's foolish to borrow trouble."

    The boy became silent, having no reply to so sensible a speech, and
    soon both were fully occupied in staring at the strange scenes spread
    out below them.  They seemed to be falling right into the middle of a
    big city which had many tall buildings with glass domes and
    sharp-pointed spires.  These spires were like great spear-points, and
    if they tumbled upon one of them they were likely to suffer serious
    injury.

    Jim the horse had seen these spires, also, and his ears stood straight
    up with fear, while Dorothy and Zeb held their breaths in suspense.
    But no; they floated gently down upon a broad, flat roof, and came to a
    stop at last.

    When Jim felt something firm under his feet the poor beast's legs
    trembled so much that he could hardly stand; but Zeb at once leaped out
    of the buggy to the roof, and he was so awkward and hasty that he
    kicked over Dorothy's bird-cage, which rolled out upon the roof so that
    the bottom came off.  At once a pink kitten crept out of the upset
    cage, sat down upon the glass roof, and yawned and blinked its round
    eyes.

    "Oh," said Dorothy.  "There's Eureka."

    "First time I ever saw a pink cat," said Zeb.

    "Eureka isn't pink; she's white.  It's this queer light that gives her
    that color."

    "Where's my milk?" asked the kitten, looking up into Dorothy's face.
    "I'm 'most starved to death."

    "Oh, Eureka!  Can you talk?"

    "Talk!  Am I talking?  Good gracious, I believe I am.  Isn't it funny?"
    asked the kitten.

    "It's all wrong," said Zeb, gravely.  "Animals ought not to talk.  But
    even old Jim has been saying things since we had our accident."

    "I can't see that it's wrong," remarked Jim, in his gruff tones.  "At
    least, it isn't as wrong as some other things.  What's going to become
    of us now?"

    "I don't know," answered the boy, looking around him curiously.

    The houses of the city were all made of glass, so clear and transparent
    that one could look through the walls as easily as through a window.
    Dorothy saw, underneath the roof on which she stood, several rooms used
    for rest chambers, and even thought she could make out a number of
    queer forms huddled into the corners of these rooms.

    The roof beside them had a great hole smashed through it, and pieces of
    glass were lying scattered in every direction.  A nearby steeple had
    been broken off short and the fragments lay heaped beside it.  Other
    buildings were cracked in places or had corners chipped off from them;
    but they must have been very beautiful before these accidents had
    happened to mar their perfection.  The rainbow tints from the colored
    suns fell upon the glass city softly and gave to the buildings many
    delicate, shifting hues which were very pretty to see.

    But not a sound had broken the stillness since the strangers had
    arrived, except that of their own voices.  They began to wonder if
    there were no people to inhabit this magnificent city of the inner
    world.

    Suddenly a man appeared through a hole in the roof next to the one they
    were on and stepped into plain view.  He was not a very large man, but
    was well formed and had a beautiful face - calm and serene as the face
    of a fine portrait.  His clothing fitted his form snugly and was
    gorgeously colored in brilliant shades of green, which varied as the
    sunbeams touched them but was not wholly influenced by the solar rays.

    The man had taken a step or two across the glass roof before he noticed
    the presence of the strangers; but then he stopped abruptly.  There was
    no expression of either fear or surprise upon his tranquil face, yet he
    must have been both astonished and afraid; for after his eyes had
    rested upon the ungainly form of the horse for a moment he walked
    rapidly to the furthest edge of the roof, his head turned back over his
    shoulder to gaze at the strange animal.

    "Look out!" cried Dorothy, who noticed that the beautiful man did not
    look where he was going; "be careful, or you'll fall off!"

    But he paid no attention to her warning.  He reached the edge of the
    tall roof, stepped one foot out into the air, and walked into space as
    calmly as if he were on firm ground.

    The girl, greatly astonished, ran to lean over the edge of the roof,
    and saw the man walking rapidly through the air toward the ground.
    Soon he reached the street and disappeared through a glass doorway into
    one of the glass buildings.

    "How strange!" she exclaimed, drawing a long breath.

    "Yes; but it's lots of fun, if it IS strange," remarked the small voice
    of the kitten, and Dorothy turned to find her pet walking in the air a
    foot or so away from the edge of the roof.

    "Come back, Eureka!" she called, in distress, "you'll certainly be
    killed."

    "I have nine lives," said the kitten, purring softly as it walked
    around in a circle and then came back to the roof;  "but I can't lose
    even one of them by falling in this country, because I really couldn't
    manage to fall if I wanted to."

    "Does the air bear up your weight?" asked the girl.

    "Of course; can't you see?" and again the kitten wandered into the air
    and back to the edge of the roof.

    "It's wonderful!" said Dorothy.

    "Suppose we let Eureka go down to the street and get some one to help
    us," suggested Zeb, who had been even more amazed than Dorothy at these
    strange happenings.

    "Perhaps we can walk on the air ourselves," replied the girl.

    Zeb drew back with a shiver.

    "I wouldn't dare try," he said.

    "Maybe Jim will go," continued Dorothy, looking at the horse.

    "And maybe he won't!" answered Jim.  "I've tumbled through the air long
    enough to make me contented on this roof."

    "But we didn't tumble to the roof," said the girl; "by the time we
    reached here we were floating very slowly, and I'm almost sure we could
    float down to the street without getting hurt.  Eureka walks on the air
    all right."

    "Eureka weights only about half a pound," replied the horse, in a
    scornful tone, "while I weigh about half a ton."

    "You don't weigh as much as you ought to, Jim," remarked the girl,
    shaking her head as she looked at the animal.  "You're dreadfully
    skinny."

    "Oh, well; I'm old," said the horse, hanging his head despondently,
    "and I've had lots of trouble in my day, little one.  For a good many
    years I drew a public cab in Chicago, and that's enough to make anyone
    skinny."

    "He eats enough to get fat, I'm sure," said the boy, gravely.

    "Do I?  Can you remember any breakfast that I've had today?" growled
    Jim, as if he resented Zeb's speech.

    "None of us has had breakfast," said the boy; "and in a time of danger
    like this it's foolish to talk about eating."

    "Nothing is more dangerous than being without food," declared the
    horse, with a sniff at the rebuke of his young master; "and just at
    present no one can tell whether there are any oats in this queer
    country or not.  If there are, they are liable to be glass oats!"

    "Oh, no!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "I can see plenty of nice gardens and
    fields down below us, at the edge of this city.  But I wish we could
    find a way to get to the ground."

    "Why don't you walk down?" asked Eureka.  "I'm as hungry as the horse
    is, and I want my milk."

    "Will you try it, Zeb?" asked the girl, turning to her companion.

    Zeb hesitated.  He was still pale and frightened, for this dreadful
    adventure had upset him and made him nervous and worried.  But he did
    not wish the little girl to think him a coward, so he advanced slowly
    to the edge of the roof.

    Dorothy stretched out a hand to him and Zeb put one foot out and let it
    rest in the air a little over the edge of the roof.  It seemed firm
    enough to walk upon, so he took courage and put out the other foot.
    Dorothy kept hold of his hand and followed him, and soon they were both
    walking through the air, with the kitten frisking beside them.

    "Come on, Jim!" called the boy.  "It's all right."

    Jim had crept to the edge of the roof to look over, and being a
    sensible horse and quite experienced, he made up his mind that he could
    go where the others did.  So, with a snort and a neigh and a whisk of
    his short tail he trotted off the roof into the air and at once began
    floating downward to the street.  His great weight made him fall faster
    than the children walked, and he passed them on the way down; but when
    he came to the glass pavement he alighted upon it so softly that he was
    not even jarred.

    "Well, well!" said Dorothy, drawing a long breath, "What a strange
    country this is."

    People began to come out of the glass doors to look at the new
    arrivals, and pretty soon quite a crowd had assembled.  There were men
    and women, but no children at all, and the folks were all beautifully
    formed and attractively dressed and had wonderfully handsome faces.
    There was not an ugly person in all the throng, yet Dorothy was not
    especially pleased by the appearance of these people because their
    features had no more expression than the faces of dolls.  They did not
    smile nor did they frown, or show either fear or surprise or curiosity
    or friendliness.  They simply started at the strangers, paying most
    attention to Jim and Eureka, for they had never before seen either a
    horse or a cat and the children bore an outward resemblance to
    themselves.

    Pretty soon a man joined the group who wore a glistening star in the
    dark hair just over his forehead.  He seemed to be a person of
    authority, for the others pressed back to give him room.  After turning
    his composed eyes first upon the animals and then upon the children he
    said to Zeb, who was a little taller than Dorothy:

    "Tell me, intruder, was it you who caused the Rain of Stones?"

    For a moment the boy did not know what he meant by this question.
    Then, remembering the stones that had fallen with them and passed them
    long before they had reached this place, he answered:

    "No, sir; we didn't cause anything.  It was the earthquake."

    The man with the star stood for a time quietly thinking over this
    speech.  Then he asked:

    "What is an earthquake?"

    "I don't know," said Zeb, who was still confused.  But Dorothy, seeing
    his perplexity, answered:

    "It's a shaking of the earth.  In this quake a big crack opened and we
    fell through - horse and buggy, and all - and the stones got loose and
    came down with us."

    The man with the star regarded her with his calm, expressionless eyes.

    "The Rain of Stones has done much damage to our city," he said; "and we
    shall hold you responsible for it unless you can prove your innocence."

    "How can we do that?" asked the girl.

    "That I am not prepared to say.  It is your affair, not mine.  You must
    go to the House of the Sorcerer, who will soon discover the truth."

    "Where is the House of the Sorcerer?" the girl enquired.

    "I will lead you to it.  Come!"

    He turned and walked down the street, and after a moment's hesitation
    Dorothy caught Eureka in her arms and climbed into the buggy.  The boy
    took his seat beside her and said: "Gid-dap Jim."

    As the horse ambled along, drawing the buggy, the people of the glass
    city made way for them and formed a procession in their rear.  Slowly
    they moved down one street and up another, turning first this way and
    then that, until they came to an open square in the center of which was
    a big glass palace having a central dome and four tall spires on each
    corner.




    3.  The Arrival Of The Wizard


    The doorway of the glass palace was quite big enough for the horse and
    buggy to enter, so Zeb drove straight through it and the children found
    themselves in a lofty hall that was very beautiful.  The people at once
    followed and formed a circle around the sides of the spacious room,
    leaving the horse and buggy and the man with the star to occupy the
    center of the hall.

    "Come to us, oh, Gwig!" called the man, in a loud voice.

    Instantly a cloud of smoke appeared and rolled over the floor; then it
    slowly spread and ascended into the dome, disclosing a strange
    personage seated upon a glass throne just before Jim's nose.  He was
    formed just as were the other inhabitants of this land and his clothing
    only differed from theirs in being bright yellow.  But he had no hair
    at all, and all over his bald head and face and upon the backs of his
    hands grew sharp thorns like those found on the branches of
    rose-bushes.  There was even a thorn upon the tip of his nose and he
    looked so funny that Dorothy laughed when she saw him.

    The Sorcerer, hearing the laugh, looked toward the little girl with
    cold, cruel eyes, and his glance made her grow sober in an instant.

    "Why have you dared to intrude your unwelcome persons into the secluded
    Land of the Mangaboos?" he asked, sternly.

    "'Cause we couldn't help it," said Dorothy.

    "Why did you wickedly and viciously send the Rain of Stones to crack
    and break our houses?" he continued.

    "We didn't," declared the girl.

    "Prove it!" cried the Sorcerer.

    "We don't have to prove it," answered Dorothy, indignantly.  "If you
    had any sense at all you'd known it was the earthquake."

    "We only know that yesterday came a Rain of Stones upon us, which did
    much damage and injured some of our people.  Today came another Rain of
    Stones, and soon after it you appeared among us."

    "By the way," said the man with the star, looking steadily at the
    Sorcerer, "you told us yesterday that there would not be a second Rain
    of Stones.  Yet one has just occurred that was even worse than the
    first.  What is your sorcery good for if it cannot tell us the truth?"

    "My sorcery does tell the truth!" declared the thorn-covered man.  "I
    said there would be but one Rain of Stones.  This second one was a Rain
    of People-and-Horse-and-Buggy.  And some stones came with them."

    "Will there be any more Rains?" asked the man with the star.

    "No, my Prince."

    "Neither stones nor people?"

    "No, my Prince."

    "Are you sure?"

    "Quite sure, my Prince.  My sorcery tells me so."

    Just then a man came running into the hall and addressed the Prince
    after making a low bow.

    "More wonders in the air, my Lord," said he.

    Immediately the Prince and all of his people flocked out of the hall
    into the street, that they might see what was about to happen.  Dorothy
    and Zeb jumped out of the buggy and ran after them, but the Sorcerer
    remained calmly in his throne.

    Far up in the air was an object that looked like a balloon.  It was not
    so high as the glowing star of the six colored suns, but was descending
    slowly through the air - so slowly that at first it scarcely seemed to
    move.

    The throng stood still and waited.  It was all they could do, for to go
    away and leave that strange sight was impossible; nor could they hurry
    its fall in any way.  The earth children were not noticed, being so
    near the average size of the Mangaboos, and the horse had remained in
    the House of the Sorcerer, with Eureka curled up asleep on the seat of
    the buggy.

    Gradually the balloon grew bigger, which was proof that it was settling
    down upon the Land of the Mangaboos.  Dorothy was surprised to find how
    patient the people were, for her own little heart was beating rapidly
    with excitement.  A balloon meant to her some other arrival from the
    surface of the earth, and she hoped it would be some one able to assist
    her and Zeb out of their difficulties.

    In an hour the balloon had come near enough for her to see a basket
    suspended below it; in two hours she could see a head looking over the
    side of the basket; in three hours the big balloon settled slowly into
    the great square in which they stood and came to rest on the glass
    pavement.

    Then a little man jumped out of the basket, took off his tall hat, and
    bowed very gracefully to the crowd of Mangaboos around him.  He was
    quite an old little man and his head was long and entirely bald.

    "Why," cried Dorothy, in amazement, "it's Oz!"

    The little man looked toward her and seemed as much surprised as she
    was.  But he smiled and bowed as he answered:

    "Yes, my dear; I am Oz, the Great and Terrible.  Eh?  And you are
    little Dorothy, from Kansas.  I remember you very well."

    "Who did you say it was?" whispered Zeb to the girl.

    "It's the wonderful Wizard of Oz.  Haven't you heard of him?"

    Just then the man with the star came and stood before the Wizard.

    "Sir," said he, "why are you here, in the Land of the Mangaboos?"

    "Didn't know what land it was, my son," returned the other, with a
    pleasant smile; "and, to be honest, I didn't mean to visit you when I
    started out.  I live on top of the earth, your honor, which is far
    better than living inside it; but yesterday I went up in a balloon, and
    when I came down I fell into a big crack in the earth, caused by an
    earthquake.  I had let so much gas out of my balloon that I could not
    rise again, and in a few minutes the earth closed over my head.  So I
    continued to descend until I reached this place, and if you will show
    me a way to get out of it, I'll go with pleasure.  Sorry to have
    troubled you; but it couldn't be helped."

    The Prince had listened with attention.  Said he:

    "This child, who is from the crust of the earth, like yourself, called
    you a Wizard.  Is not a Wizard something like a Sorcerer?"

    "It's better," replied Oz, promptly.  "One Wizard is worth three
    Sorcerers."

    "Ah, you shall prove that," said the Prince.  "We Mangaboos have, at
    the present time, one of the most wonderful Sorcerers that ever was
    picked from a bush; but he sometimes makes mistakes.  Do you ever make
    mistakes?"

    "Never!" declared the Wizard, boldly.

    "Oh, Oz!" said Dorothy; "you made a lot of mistakes when you were in
    the marvelous Land of Oz."

    "Nonsense!" said the little man, turning red - although just then a ray
    of violet sunlight was on his round face.

    "Come with me," said the Prince to him.  "I wish to meet our Sorcerer."

    The Wizard did not like this invitation, but he could not refuse to
    accept it.  So he followed the Prince into the great domed hall, and
    Dorothy and Zeb came after them, while the throng of people trooped in
    also.

    There sat the thorny Sorcerer in his chair of state, and when the
    Wizard saw him he began to laugh, uttering comical little chuckles.

    "What an absurd creature!" he exclaimed.

    "He may look absurd," said the Prince, in his quiet voice; "but he is
    an excellent Sorcerer.  The only fault I find with him is that he is so
    often wrong."

    "I am never wrong," answered the Sorcerer.

    "Only a short time ago you told me there would be no more Rain of
    Stones or of People," said the Prince.

    "Well, what then?"

    "Here is another person descended from the air to prove you were wrong."

    "One person cannot be called 'people,'" said the Sorcerer.  "If two
    should come out of the sky you might with justice say I was wrong; but
    unless more than this one appears I will hold that I was right."

    "Very clever," said the Wizard, nodding his head as if pleased.  "I am
    delighted to find humbugs inside the earth, just the same as on top of
    it.  Were you ever with a circus, brother?"

    "No," said the Sorcerer.

    "You ought to join one," declared the little man seriously.  "I belong
    to Bailum & Barney's Great Consolidated Shows - three rings in one tent
    and a menagerie on the side.  It's a fine aggregation, I assure you."

    "What do you do?" asked the Sorcerer.

    "I go up in a balloon, usually, to draw the crowds to the circus.  But
    I've just had the bad luck to come out of the sky, skip the solid
    earth, and land lower down than I intended.  But never mind.  It isn't
    everybody who gets a chance to see your Land of the Gabazoos."

    "Mangaboos," said the Sorcerer, correcting him.  "If you are a Wizard
    you ought to be able to call people by their right names."

    "Oh, I'm a Wizard; you may be sure of that.  Just as good a Wizard as
    you are a Sorcerer."

    "That remains to be seen," said the other.

    "If you are able to prove that you are better," said the Prince to the
    little man, "I will make you the Chief Wizard of this domain.
    Otherwise - "

    "What will happen otherwise?" asked the Wizard.

    "I will stop you from living and forbid you to be planted," returned
    the Prince.

    "That does not sound especially pleasant," said the little man, looking
    at the one with the star uneasily.  "But never mind.  I'll beat Old
    Prickly, all right."

    "My name is Gwig," said the Sorcerer, turning his heartless, cruel eyes
    upon his rival.  "Let me see you equal the sorcery I am about to
    perform."

    He waved a thorny hand and at once the tinkling of bells was heard,
    playing sweet music.  Yet, look where she would, Dorothy could discover
    no bells at all in the great glass hall.

    The Mangaboo people listened, but showed no great interest.  It was one
    of the things Gwig usually did to prove he was a sorcerer.

    Now was the Wizard's turn, so he smiled upon the assemblage and asked:

    "Will somebody kindly loan me a hat?"

    No one did, because the Mangaboos did not wear hats, and Zeb had lost
    his, somehow, in his flight through the air.

    "Ahem!" said the Wizard, "will somebody please loan me a handkerchief?"

    But they had no handkerchiefs, either.

    "Very good," remarked the Wizard.  "I'll use my own hat, if you please.
    Now, good people, observe me carefully.  You see, there is nothing up
    my sleeve and nothing concealed about my person.  Also, my hat is quite
    empty."  He took off his hat and held it upside down, shaking it
    briskly.

    "Let me see it," said the Sorcerer.

    He took the hat and examined it carefully, returning it afterward to
    the Wizard.

    "Now," said the little man, "I will create something out of nothing."

    He placed the hat upon the glass floor, made a pass with his hand, and
    then removed the hat, displaying a little white piglet no bigger than a
    mouse, which began to run around here and there and to grunt and squeal
    in a tiny, shrill voice.

    The people watched it intently, for they had never seen a pig before,
    big or little.  The Wizard reached out, caught the wee creature in his
    hand, and holding its head between one thumb and finger and its tail
    between the other thumb and finger he pulled it apart, each of the two
    parts becoming a whole and separate piglet in an instant.

    He placed one upon the floor, so that it could run around, and pulled
    apart the other, making three piglets in all; and then one of these was
    pulled apart, making four piglets.  The Wizard continued this
    surprising performance until nine tiny piglets were running about at
    his feet, all squealing and grunting in a very comical way.

    "Now," said the Wizard of Oz, "having created something from nothing, I
    will make something nothing again."

    With this he caught up two of the piglets and pushed them together, so
    that the two were one.  Then he caught up another piglet and pushed it
    into the first, where it disappeared.  And so, one by one, the nine
    tiny piglets were pushed together until but a single one of the
    creatures remained.  This the Wizard placed underneath his hat and made
    a mystic sign above it.  When he removed his hat the last piglet had
    disappeared entirely.

    The little man gave a bow to the silent throng that had watched him,
    and then the Prince said, in his cold, calm voice:

    "You are indeed a wonderful Wizard, and your powers are greater than
    those of my Sorcerer."

    "He will not be a wonderful Wizard long," remarked Gwig.

    "Why not?" enquired the Wizard.

    "Because I am going to stop your breath," was the reply.  "I perceive
    that you are curiously constructed, and that if you cannot breathe you
    cannot keep alive."

    The little man looked troubled.

    "How long will it take you to stop my breath?" he asked.

    "About five minutes.  I'm going to begin now.  Watch me carefully."

    He began making queer signs and passes toward the Wizard; but the
    little man did not watch him long.  Instead, he drew a leathern case
    from his pocket and took from it several sharp knives, which he joined
    together, one after another, until they made a long sword.  By the time
    he had attached a handle to this sword he was having much trouble to
    breathe, as the charm of the Sorcerer was beginning to take effect.

    So the Wizard lost no more time, but leaping forward he raised the
    sharp sword, whirled it once or twice around his head, and then gave a
    mighty stroke that cut the body of the Sorcerer exactly in two.

    Dorothy screamed and expected to see a terrible sight; but as the two
    halves of the Sorcerer fell apart on the floor she saw that he had no
    bones or blood inside of him at all, and that the place where he was
    cut looked much like a sliced turnip or potato.

    "Why, he's vegetable!" cried the Wizard, astonished.

    "Of course," said the Prince.  "We are all vegetable, in this country.
    Are you not vegetable, also?"

    "No," answered the Wizard.  "People on top of the earth are all meat.
    Will your Sorcerer die?"

    "Certainly, sir.  He is really dead now, and will wither very quickly.
    So we must plant him at once, that other Sorcerers may grow upon his
    bush," continued the Prince.

    "What do you mean by that?" asked the little Wizard, greatly puzzled.

    "If you will accompany me to our public gardens," replied the Prince,
    "I will explain to you much better than I can here the mysteries of our
    Vegetable Kingdom."




    4.  The Vegetable Kingdom


    After the Wizard had wiped the dampness from his sword and taken it
    apart and put the pieces into their leathern case again, the man with
    the star ordered some of his people to carry the two halves of the
    Sorcerer to the public gardens.

    Jim pricked up his ears when he heard they were going to the gardens,
    and wanted to join the party, thinking he might find something proper
    to eat; so Zeb put down the top of the buggy and invited the Wizard to
    ride with them.  The seat was amply wide enough for the little man and
    the two children, and when Jim started to leave the hall the kitten
    jumped upon his back and sat there quite contentedly.

    So the procession moved through the streets, the bearers of the
    Sorcerer first, the Prince next, then Jim drawing the buggy with the
    strangers inside of it, and last the crowd of vegetable people who had
    no hearts and could neither smile nor frown.

    The glass city had several fine streets, for a good many people lived
    there; but when the procession had passed through these it came upon a
    broad plain covered with gardens and watered by many pretty brooks that
    flowed through it.  There were paths through these gardens, and over
    some of the brooks were ornamental glass bridges.

    Dorothy and Zeb now got out of the buggy and walked beside the Prince,
    so that they might see and examine the flowers and plants better.

    "Who built these lovely bridges?" asked the little girl.

    "No one built them," answered the man with the star.  "They grow."

    "That's queer," said she.  "Did the glass houses in your city grow,
    too?"

    "Of course," he replied.  "But it took a good many years for them to
    grow as large and fine as they are now.  That is why we are so angry
    when a Rain of Stones comes to break our towers and crack our roofs."

    "Can't you mend them?" she enquired.

    "No; but they will grow together again, in time, and we must wait until
    they do."

    They first passed through many beautiful gardens of flowers, which grew
    nearest the city; but Dorothy could hardly tell what kind of flowers
    they were, because the colors were constantly changing under the
    shifting lights of the six suns.  A flower would be pink one second,
    white the next, then blue or yellow; and it was the same way when they
    came to the plants, which had broad leaves and grew close to the ground.

    When they passed over a field of grass Jim immediately stretched down
    his head and began to nibble.

    "A nice country this is," he grumbled, "where a respectable horse has
    to eat pink grass!"

    "It's violet," said the Wizard, who was in the buggy.

    "Now it's blue," complained the horse.  "As a matter of fact, I'm
    eating rainbow grass."

    "How does it taste?" asked the Wizard.

    "Not bad at all," said Jim.  "If they give me plenty of it I'll not
    complain about its color."

    By this time the party had reached a freshly plowed field, and the
    Prince said to Dorothy:

    "This is our planting-ground."

    Several Mangaboos came forward with glass spades and dug a hole in the
    ground.  Then they put the two halves of the Sorcerer into it and
    covered him up.  After that other people brought water from a brook and
    sprinkled the earth.

    "He will sprout very soon," said the Prince, "and grow into a large
    bush, from which we shall in time be able to pick several very good
    sorcerers."

    "Do all your people grow on bushes?" asked the boy.

    "Certainly," was the reply.  "Do not all people grow upon bushes where
    you came from, on the outside of the earth?"

    "Not that I ever hear of."

    "How strange!  But if you will come with me to one of our folk gardens
    I will show you the way we grow in the Land of the Mangaboos."

    It appeared that these odd people, while they were able to walk through
    the air with ease, usually moved upon the ground in the ordinary way.
    There were no stairs in their houses, because they did not need them,
    but on a level surface they generally walked just as we do.

    The little party of strangers now followed the Prince across a few more
    of the glass bridges and along several paths until they came to a
    garden enclosed by a high hedge.  Jim had refused to leave the field of
    grass, where he was engaged in busily eating; so the Wizard got out of
    the buggy and joined Zeb and Dorothy, and the kitten followed demurely
    at their heels.

    Inside the hedge they came upon row after row of large and handsome
    plants with broad leaves gracefully curving until their points nearly
    reached the ground.  In the center of each plant grew a daintily
    dressed Mangaboo, for the clothing of all these creatures grew upon
    them and was attached to their bodies.

    The growing Mangaboos were of all sizes, from the blossom that had just
    turned into a wee baby to the full-grown and almost ripe man or woman.
    On some of the bushes might be seen a bud, a blossom, a baby, a
    half-grown person and a ripe one; but even those ready to pluck were
    motionless and silent, as if devoid of life.  This sight explained to
    Dorothy why she had seen no children among the Mangaboos, a thing she
    had until now been unable to account for.

    "Our people do not acquire their real life until they leave their
    bushes," said the Prince.  "You will notice they are all attached to
    the plants by the soles of their feet, and when they are quite ripe
    they are easily separated from the stems and at once attain the powers
    of motion and speech.  So while they grow they cannot be said to really
    live, and they must be picked before they can become good citizens."

    "How long do you live, after you are picked?" asked Dorothy.

    "That depends upon the care we take of ourselves," he replied.  "If we
    keep cool and moist, and meet with no accidents, we often live for five
    years.  I've been picked over six years, but our family is known to be
    especially long lived."

    "Do you eat?" asked the boy.

    "Eat!  No, indeed.  We are quite solid inside our bodies, and have no
    need to eat, any more than does a potato."

    "But the potatoes sometimes sprout," said Zeb.

    "And sometimes we do," answered the Prince; "but that is considered a
    great misfortune, for then we must be planted at once."

    "Where did you grow?" asked the Wizard.

    "I will show you," was the reply. "Step this way, please."

    He led them within another but smaller circle of hedge, where grew one
    large and beautiful bush.

    "This," said he, "is the Royal Bush of the Mangaboos.  All of our
    Princes and Rulers have grown upon this one bush from time immemorial."

    They stood before it in silent admiration.  On the central stalk stood
    poised the figure of a girl so exquisitely formed and colored and so
    lovely in the expression of her delicate features that Dorothy thought
    she had never seen so sweet and adorable a creature in all her life.
    The maiden's gown was soft as satin and fell about her in ample folds,
    while dainty lace-like traceries trimmed the bodice and sleeves.  Her
    flesh was fine and smooth as polished ivory, and her poise expressed
    both dignity and grace.

    "Who is this?" asked the Wizard, curiously.

    The Prince had been staring hard at the girl on the bush.  Now he
    answered, with a touch of uneasiness in his cold tones:

    "She is the Ruler destined to be my successor, for she is a Royal
    Princess.  When she becomes fully ripe I must abandon the sovereignty
    of the Mangaboos to her."

    "Isn't she ripe now?" asked Dorothy.

    He hesitated.

    "Not quite," said he, finally.  "It will be several days before she
    needs to be picked, or at least that is my judgment.  I am in no hurry
    to resign my office and be planted, you may be sure."

    "Probably not," declared the Wizard, nodding.

    "This is one of the most unpleasant things about our vegetable lives,"
    continued the Prince, with a sigh, "that while we are in our full prime
    we must give way to another, and be covered up in the ground to sprout
    and grow and give birth to other people."

    "I'm sure the Princess is ready to be picked," asserted Dorothy, gazing
    hard at the beautiful girl on the bush.  "She's as perfect as she can
    be."

    "Never mind," answered the Prince, hastily, "she will be all right for
    a few days longer, and it is best for me to rule until I can dispose of
    you strangers, who have come to our land uninvited and must be attended
    to at once."

    "What are you going to do with us?" asked Zeb.

    "That is a matter I have not quite decided upon," was the reply.  "I
    think I shall keep this Wizard until a new Sorcerer is ready to pick,
    for he seems quite skillful and may be of use to us.  But the rest of
    you must be destroyed in some way, and you cannot be planted, because I
    do not wish horses and cats and meat people growing all over our
    country."

    "You needn't worry," said Dorothy.  "We wouldn't grow under ground, I'm
    sure."

    "But why destroy my friends?" asked the little Wizard.  "Why not let
    them live?"

    "They do not belong here," returned the Prince.  "They have no right to
    be inside the earth at all."

    "We didn't ask to come down here; we fell," said Dorothy.

    "That is no excuse," declared the Prince, coldly.

    The children looked at each other in perplexity, and the Wizard sighed.
    Eureka rubbed her paw on her face and said in her soft, purring voice:

    "He won't need to destroy ME, for if I don't get something to eat
    pretty soon I shall starve to death, and so save him the trouble."

    "If he planted you, he might grow some cat-tails," suggested the Wizard.

    "Oh, Eureka! perhaps we can find you some milk-weeds to eat," said the
    boy.

    "Phoo!" snarled the kitten; "I wouldn't touch the nasty things!"

    "You don't need milk, Eureka," remarked Dorothy; "you are big enough
    now to eat any kind of food."

    "If I can get it," added Eureka.

    "I'm hungry myself," said Zeb.  "But I noticed some strawberries
    growing in one of the gardens, and some melons in another place.  These
    people don't eat such things, so perhaps on our way back they will let
    us get them."

    "Never mind your hunger," interrupted the Prince.  "I shall order you
    destroyed in a few minutes, so you will have no need to ruin our pretty
    melon vines and berry bushes.  Follow me, please, to meet your doom."




    5.  Dorothy Picks the Princess


    The words of the cold and moist vegetable Prince were not very
    comforting, and as he spoke them he turned away and left the enclosure.
    The children, feeling sad and despondent, were about to follow him when
    the Wizard touched Dorothy softly on her shoulder.

    "Wait!" he whispered.

    "What for?" asked the girl.

    "Suppose we pick the Royal Princess," said the Wizard.  "I'm quite sure
    she's ripe, and as soon as she comes to life she will be the Ruler, and
    may treat us better than that heartless Prince intends to."

    "All right!" exclaimed Dorothy, eagerly.  "Let's pick her while we have
    the chance, before the man with the star comes back."

    So together they leaned over the great bush and each of them seized one
    hand of the lovely Princess.

    "Pull!" cried Dorothy, and as they did so the royal lady leaned toward
    them and the stems snapped and separated from her feet.  She was not at
    all heavy, so the Wizard and Dorothy managed to lift her gently to the
    ground.

    The beautiful creature passed her hands over her eyes an instant,
    tucked in a stray lock of hair that had become disarranged, and after a
    look around the garden made those present a gracious bow and said, in a
    sweet but even toned voice:

    "I thank you very much."

    "We salute your Royal Highness!" cried the Wizard, kneeling and kissing
    her hand.

    Just then the voice of the Prince was heard calling upon them to
    hasten, and a moment later he returned to the enclosure, followed by a
    number of his people.

    Instantly the Princess turned and faced him, and when he saw that she
    was picked the Prince stood still and began to tremble.

    "Sir," said the Royal Lady, with much dignity, "you have wronged me
    greatly, and would have wronged me still more had not these strangers
    come to my rescue.  I have been ready for picking all the past week,
    but because you were selfish and desired to continue your unlawful
    rule, you left me to stand silent upon my bush."

    "I did not know that you were ripe," answered the Prince, in a low
    voice.

    "Give me the Star of Royalty!" she commanded.

    Slowly he took the shining star from his own brow and placed it upon
    that of the Princess.  Then all the people bowed low to her, and the
    Prince turned and walked away alone.  What became of him afterward our
    friends never knew.

    The people of Mangaboo now formed themselves into a procession and
    marched toward the glass city to escort their new ruler to her palace
    and to perform those ceremonies proper to the occasion.  But while the
    people in the procession walked upon the ground the Princess walked in
    the air just above their heads, to show that she was a superior being
    and more exalted than her subjects.

    No one now seemed to pay any attention to the strangers, so Dorothy and
    Zeb and the Wizard let the train pass on and then wandered by
    themselves into the vegetable gardens.  They did not bother to cross
    the bridges over the brooks, but when they came to a stream they
    stepped high and walked in the air to the other side.  This was a very
    interesting experience to them, and Dorothy said:

    "I wonder why it is that we can walk so easily in the air."

    "Perhaps," answered the Wizard, "it is because we are close to the
    center of the earth, where the attraction of gravitation is very
    slight.  But I've noticed that many queer things happen in fairy
    countries."

    "Is this a fairy country?" asked the boy.

    "Of course it is," returned Dorothy promptly.  "Only a fairy country
    could have veg'table people; and only in a fairy country could Eureka
    and Jim talk as we do."

    "That's true," said Zeb, thoughtfully.

    In the vegetable gardens they found the strawberries and melons, and
    several other unknown but delicious fruits, of which they ate heartily.
    But the kitten bothered them constantly by demanding milk or meat, and
    called the Wizard names because he could not bring her a dish of milk
    by means of his magical arts.

    As they sat upon the grass watching Jim, who was still busily eating,
    Eureka said:

    "I don't believe you are a Wizard at all!"

    "No," answered the little man, "you are quite right.  In the strict
    sense of the word I am not a Wizard, but only a humbug."

    "The Wizard of Oz has always been a humbug," agreed Dorothy.  "I've
    known him for a long time."

    "If that is so," said the boy, "how could he do that wonderful trick
    with the nine tiny piglets?"

    "Don't know," said Dorothy, "but it must have been humbug."

    "Very true," declared the Wizard, nodding at her.  "It was necessary to
    deceive that ugly Sorcerer and the Prince, as well as their stupid
    people; but I don't mind telling you, who are my friends, that the
    thing was only a trick."

    "But I saw the little pigs with my own eyes!" exclaimed Zeb.

    "So did I," purred the kitten.

    "To be sure," answered the Wizard.  "You saw them because they were
    there.  They are in my inside pocket now.  But the pulling of them
    apart and pushing them together again was only a sleight-of-hand trick."

    "Let's see the pigs," said Eureka, eagerly.

    The little man felt carefully in his pocket and pulled out the tiny
    piglets, setting them upon the grass one by one, where they ran around
    and nibbled the tender blades.

    "They're hungry, too," he said.

    "Oh, what cunning things!" cried Dorothy, catching up one and petting
    it.

    "Be careful!" said the piglet, with a squeal, "you're squeezing me!"

    "Dear me!" murmured the Wizard, looking at his pets in astonishment.
    "They can actually talk!"

    "May I eat one of them?" asked the kitten, in a pleading voice.  "I'm
    awfully hungry."

    "Why, Eureka," said Dorothy, reproachfully, "what a cruel question!  It
    would be dreadful to eat these dear little things."

    "I should say so!" grunted another of the piglets, looking uneasily at
    the kitten; "cats are cruel things."

    "I'm not cruel," replied the kitten, yawning.  "I'm just hungry."

    "You cannot eat my piglets, even if you are starving,"  declared the
    little man, in a stern voice.  "They are the only things I have to
    prove I'm a wizard."

    "How did they happen to be so little?" asked Dorothy.  "I never saw
    such small pigs before."

    "They are from the Island of Teenty-Weent," said the Wizard, "where
    everything is small because it's a small island.  A sailor brought them
    to Los Angeles and I gave him nine tickets to the circus for them."

    "But what am I going to eat?" wailed the kitten, sitting in front of
    Dorothy and looking pleadingly into her face.  "There are no cows here
    to give milk; or any mice, or even grasshoppers.  And if I can't eat
    the piglets you may as well plant me at once and raise catsup."

    "I have an idea," said the Wizard, "that there are fishes in these
    brooks.  Do you like fish?"

    "Fish!" cried the kitten.  "Do I like fish?  Why, they're better than
    piglets - or even milk!"

    "Then I'll try to catch you some," said he.

    "But won't they be veg'table, like everything else here?" asked the
    kitten.

    "I think not.  Fishes are not animals, and they are as cold and moist
    as the vegetables themselves.  There is no reason, that I can see, why
    they may not exist in the waters of this strange country."

    Then the Wizard bent a pin for a hook and took a long piece of string
    from his pocket for a fish-line.  The only bait he could find was a
    bright red blossom from a flower; but he knew fishes are easy to fool
    if anything bright attracts their attention, so he decided to try the
    blossom.  Having thrown the end of his line in the water of a nearby
    brook he soon felt a sharp tug that told him a fish had bitten and was
    caught on the bent pin; so the little man drew in the string and, sure
    enough, the fish came with it and was landed safely on the shore, where
    it began to flop around in great excitement.

    The fish was fat and round, and its scales glistened like beautifully
    cut jewels set close together; but there was no time to examine it
    closely, for Eureka made a jump and caught it between her claws, and in
    a few moments it had entirely disappeared.

    "Oh, Eureka!" cried Dorothy, "did you eat the bones?"

    "If it had any bones, I ate them," replied the kitten, composedly, as
    it washed its face after the meal.  "But I don't think that fish had
    any bones, because I didn't feel them scratch my throat."

    "You were very greedy," said the girl.

    "I was very hungry," replied the kitten.

    The little pigs had stood huddled in a group, watching this scene with
    frightened eyes.

    "Cats are dreadful creatures!" said one of them.

    "I'm glad we are not fishes!" said another.

    "Don't worry,"  Dorothy murmured, soothingly,  "I'll not let the kitten
    hurt you."

    Then she happened to remember that in a corner of her suit-case were
    one or two crackers that were left over from her luncheon on the train,
    and she went to the buggy and brought them.  Eureka stuck up her nose
    at such food, but the tiny piglets squealed delightedly at the sight of
    the crackers and ate them up in a jiffy.

    "Now let us go back to the city," suggested the Wizard.  "That is, if
    Jim has had enough of the pink grass."

    The cab-horse, who was browsing near, lifted his head with a sigh.

    "I've tried to eat a lot while I had the chance," said he, "for it's
    likely to be a long while between meals in this strange country.  But
    I'm ready to go, now, at any time you wish."

    So, after the Wizard had put the piglets back into his inside pocket,
    where they cuddled up and went to sleep, the three climbed into the
    buggy and Jim started back to the town.

    "Where shall we stay?" asked the girl.

    "I think I shall take possession of the House of the Sorcerer," replied
    the Wizard; "for the Prince said in the presence of his people that he
    would keep me until they picked another Sorcerer, and the new Princess
    won't know but that we belong there."

    They agreed to this plan, and when they reached the great square Jim
    drew the buggy into the big door of the domed hall.

    "It doesn't look very homelike," said Dorothy, gazing around at the
    bare room.  "But it's a place to stay, anyhow."

    "What are those holes up there?" enquired the boy, pointing to some
    openings that appeared near the top of the dome.

    "They look like doorways," said Dorothy; "only there are no stairs to
    get to them."

    "You forget that stairs are unnecessary," observed the Wizard.  "Let us
    walk up, and see where the doors lead to."

    With this he began walking in the air toward the high openings, and
    Dorothy and Zeb followed him.  It was the same sort of climb one
    experiences when walking up a hill, and they were nearly out of breath
    when they came to the row of openings, which they perceived to be
    doorways leading into halls in the upper part of the house.  Following
    these halls they discovered many small rooms opening from them, and
    some were furnished with glass benches, tables and chairs.  But there
    were no beds at all.

    "I wonder if these people never sleep," said the girl.

    "Why, there seems to be no night at all in this country," Zeb replied.
    "Those colored suns are exactly in the same place they were when we
    came, and if there is no sunset there can be no night."

    "Very true," agreed the Wizard.  "But it is a long time since I have
    had any sleep, and I'm tired.  So I think I shall lie down upon one of
    these hard glass benches and take a nap."

    "I will, too," said Dorothy, and chose a little room at the end of the
    hall.

    Zeb walked down again to unharness Jim, who, when he found himself
    free, rolled over a few times and then settled down to sleep, with
    Eureka nestling comfortably beside his big, boney body.  Then the boy
    returned to one of the upper rooms, and in spite of the hardness of the
    glass bench was soon deep in slumberland.




    6.  The Mangaboos Prove Dangerous


    When the Wizard awoke the six colored suns were shining down upon the
    Land of the Mangaboos just as they had done ever since his arrival.
    The little man, having had a good sleep, felt rested and refreshed, and
    looking through the glass partition of the room he saw Zeb sitting up
    on his bench and yawning.  So the Wizard went in to him.

    "Zeb," said he, "my balloon is of no further use in this strange
    country, so I may as well leave it on the square where it fell.  But in
    the basket-car are some things I would like to keep with me.  I wish
    you would go and fetch my satchel, two lanterns, and a can of kerosene
    oil that is under the seat.  There is nothing else that I care about."

    So the boy went willingly upon the errand, and by the time he had
    returned Dorothy was awake.  Then the three held a counsel to decide
    what they should do next, but could think of no way to better their
    condition.

    "I don't like these veg'table people," said the little girl.  "They're
    cold and flabby, like cabbages, in spite of their prettiness."

    "I agree with you.  It is because there is no warm blood in them,"
    remarked the Wizard.

    "And they have no hearts; so they can't love anyone - not even
    themselves," declared the boy.

    "The Princess is lovely to look at," continued Dorothy, thoughtfully;
    "but I don't care much for her, after all.  If there was any other
    place to go, I'd like to go there."

    "But IS there any other place?" asked the Wizard.

    "I don't know," she answered.

    Just then they heard the big voice of Jim the cab-horse calling to
    them, and going to the doorway leading to the dome they found the
    Princess and a throng of her people had entered the House of the
    Sorcerer.

    So they went down to greet the beautiful vegetable lady, who said to
    them:

    "I have been talking with my advisors about you meat people, and we
    have decided that you do not belong in the Land of the Mangaboos and
    must not remain here."

    "How can we go away?" asked Dorothy.

    "Oh, you cannot go away, of course; so you must be destroyed," was the
    answer.

    "In what way?" enquired the Wizard.

    "We shall throw you three people into the Garden of the Twining Vines,"
    said the Princess, "and they will soon crush you and devour your bodies
    to make themselves grow bigger.  The animals you have with you we will
    drive to the mountains and put into the Black Pit.  Then our country
    will be rid of all its unwelcome visitors."

    "But you are in need of a Sorcerer," said the Wizard, "and not one of
    those growing is yet ripe enough to pick.  I am greater than any
    thorn-covered sorcerer that every grew in your garden.  Why destroy me?"

    "It is true we need a Sorcerer," acknowledged the Princess, "but I am
    informed that one of our own will be ready to pick in a few days, to
    take the place of Gwig, whom you cut in two before it was time for him
    to be planted.  Let us see your arts, and the sorceries you are able to
    perform.  Then I will decide whether to destroy you with the others or
    not."

    At this the Wizard made a bow to the people and repeated his trick of
    producing the nine tiny piglets and making them disappear again.  He
    did it very cleverly, indeed, and the Princess looked at the strange
    piglets as if she were as truly astonished as any vegetable person
    could be.  But afterward she said:

    "I have heard of this wonderful magic.  But it accomplishes nothing of
    value.  What else can you do?"

    The Wizard tried to think.  Then he jointed together the blades of his
    sword and balanced it very skillfully upon the end of his nose.  But
    even that did not satisfy the Princess.

    Just then his eye fell upon the lanterns and the can of kerosene oil
    which Zeb had brought from the car of his balloon, and he got a clever
    idea from those commonplace things.

    "Your Highness," said he, "I will now proceed to prove my magic by
    creating two suns that you have never seen before; also I will exhibit
    a Destroyer much more dreadful that your Clinging Vines."

    So he placed Dorothy upon one side of him and the boy upon the other
    and set a lantern upon each of their heads.

    "Don't laugh," he whispered to them, "or you will spoil the effect of
    my magic."

    Then, with much dignity and a look of vast importance upon his wrinkled
    face, the Wizard got out his match-box and lighted the two lanterns.
    The glare they made was very small when compared with the radiance of
    the six great colored suns; but still they gleamed steadily and
    clearly.  The Mangaboos were much impressed because they had never
    before seen any light that did not come directly from their suns.

    Next the Wizard poured a pool of oil from the can upon the glass floor,
    where it covered quite a broad surface.  When he lighted the oil a
    hundred tongues of flame shot up, and the effect was really imposing.

    "Now, Princess," exclaimed the Wizard, "those of your advisors who
    wished to throw us into the Garden of Clinging Vines must step within
    this circle of light.  If they advised you well, and were in the right,
    they will not be injured in any way.  But if any advised you wrongly,
    the light will wither him."

    The advisors of the Princess did not like this test; but she commanded
    them to step into the flame and one by one they did so, and were
    scorched so badly that the air was soon filled with an odor like that
    of baked potatoes.  Some of the Mangaboos fell down and had to be
    dragged from the fire, and all were so withered that it would be
    necessary to plant them at once.

    "Sir," said the Princess to the Wizard, "you are greater than any
    Sorcerer we have ever known.  As it is evident that my people have
    advised me wrongly, I will not cast you three people into the dreadful
    Garden of the Clinging Vines; but your animals must be driven into the
    Black Pit in the mountain, for my subjects cannot bear to have them
    around."

    The Wizard was so pleased to have saved the two children and himself
    that he said nothing against this decree; but when the Princess had
    gone both Jim and Eureka protested they did not want to go to the Black
    Pit, and Dorothy promised she would do all that she could to save them
    from such a fate.

    For two or three days after this - if we call days the periods between
    sleep, there being no night to divide the hours into days - our friends
    were not disturbed in any way.  They were even permitted to occupy the
    House of the Sorcerer in peace, as if it had been their own, and to
    wander in the gardens in search of food.

    Once they came near to the enclosed Garden of the Clinging Vines, and
    walking high into the air looked down upon it with much interest.  They
    saw a mass of tough green vines all matted together and writhing and
    twisting around like a nest of great snakes.  Everything the vines
    touched they crushed, and our adventurers were indeed thankful to have
    escaped being cast among them.

    Whenever the Wizard went to sleep he would take the nine tiny piglets
    from his pocket and let them run around on the floor of his room to
    amuse themselves and get some exercise; and one time they found his
    glass door ajar and wandered into the hall and then into the bottom
    part of the great dome, walking through the air as easily as Eureka
    could.  They knew the kitten, by this time, so they scampered over to
    where she lay beside Jim and commenced to frisk and play with her.

    The cab-horse, who never slept long at a time, sat upon his haunches
    and watched the tiny piglets and the kitten with much approval.

    "Don't be rough!" he would call out, if Eureka knocked over one of the
    round, fat piglets with her paw; but the pigs never minded, and enjoyed
    the sport very greatly.

    Suddenly they looked up to find the room filled with the silent,
    solemn-eyed Mangaboos.  Each of the vegetable folks bore a branch
    covered with sharp thorns, which was thrust defiantly toward the horse,
    the kitten and the piglets.

    "Here - stop this foolishness!" Jim roared, angrily; but after being
    pricked once or twice he got upon his four legs and kept out of the way
    of the thorns.

    The Mangaboos surrounded them in solid ranks, but left an opening to
    the doorway of the hall; so the animals slowly retreated until they
    were driven from the room and out upon the street.  Here were more of
    the vegetable people with thorns, and silently they urged the now
    frightened creatures down the street.  Jim had to be careful not to
    step upon the tiny piglets, who scampered under his feet grunting and
    squealing, while Eureka, snarling and biting at the thorns pushed
    toward her, also tried to protect the pretty little things from injury.
    Slowly but steadily the heartless Mangaboos drove them on, until they
    had passed through the city and the gardens and come to the broad
    plains leading to the mountain.

    "What does all this mean, anyhow?" asked the horse, jumping to escape a
    thorn.

    "Why, they are driving us toward the Black Pit, into which they
    threatened to cast us," replied the kitten.  "If I were as big as you
    are, Jim, I'd fight these miserable turnip-roots!"

    "What would you do?" enquired Jim.

    "I'd kick out with those long legs and iron-shod hoofs."

    "All right," said the horse; "I'll do it."

    An instant later he suddenly backed toward the crowd of Mangaboos and
    kicked out his hind legs as hard as he could.  A dozen of them smashed
    together and tumbled to the ground, and seeing his success Jim kicked
    again and again, charging into the vegetable crowd, knocking them in
    all directions and sending the others scattering to escape his iron
    heels.  Eureka helped him by flying into the faces of the enemy and
    scratching and biting furiously, and the kitten ruined so many
    vegetable complexions that the Mangaboos feared her as much as they did
    the horse.

    But the foes were too many to be repulsed for long.  They tired Jim and
    Eureka out, and although the field of battle was thickly covered with
    mashed and disabled Mangaboos, our animal friends had to give up at
    last and allow themselves to be driven to the mountain.




    7.  Into the Black Pit and Out Again


    When they came to the mountain it proved to be a rugged, towering chunk
    of deep green glass, and looked dismal and forbidding in the extreme.
    Half way up the steep was a yawning cave, black as night beyond the
    point where the rainbow rays of the colored suns reached into it.

    The Mangaboos drove the horse and the kitten and the piglets into this
    dark hole and then, having pushed the buggy in after them - for it
    seemed some of them had dragged it all the way from the domed
    hall - they began to pile big glass rocks within the entrance, so that
    the prisoners could not get out again.

    "This is dreadful!" groaned Jim.  "It will be about the end of our
    adventures, I guess."

    "If the Wizard was here," said one of the piglets, sobbing bitterly,
    "he would not see us suffer so."

    "We ought to have called him and Dorothy when we were first attacked,"
    added Eureka.  "But never mind; be brave, my friends, and I will go and
    tell our masters where you are, and get them to come to your rescue."

    The mouth of the hole was nearly filled up now, but the kitten gave a
    leap through the remaining opening and at once scampered up into the
    air.  The Mangaboos saw her escape, and several of them caught up their
    thorns and gave chase, mounting through the air after her.  Eureka,
    however, was lighter than the Mangaboos, and while they could mount
    only about a hundred feet above the earth the kitten found she could go
    nearly two hundred feet.  So she ran along over their heads until she
    had left them far behind and below and had come to the city and the
    House of the Sorcerer.  There she entered in at Dorothy's window in the
    dome and aroused her from her sleep.

    As soon as the little girl knew what had happened she awakened the
    Wizard and Zeb, and at once preparations were made to go to the rescue
    of Jim and the piglets.  The Wizard carried his satchel, which was
    quite heavy, and Zeb carried the two lanterns and the oil can.
    Dorothy's wicker suit-case was still under the seat of the buggy, and
    by good fortune the boy had also placed the harness in the buggy when
    he had taken it off from Jim to let the horse lie down and rest.  So
    there was nothing for the girl to carry but the kitten, which she held
    close to her bosom and tried to comfort, for its little heart was still
    beating rapidly.

    Some of the Mangaboos discovered them as soon as they left the House of
    the Sorcerer; but when they started toward the mountain the vegetable
    people allowed them to proceed without interference, yet followed in a
    crowd behind them so that they could not go back again.

    Before long they neared the Black Pit, where a busy swarm of Mangaboos,
    headed by their Princess, was engaged in piling up glass rocks before
    the entrance.

    "Stop, I command you!" cried the Wizard, in an angry tone, and at once
    began pulling down the rocks to liberate Jim and the piglets.  Instead
    of opposing him in this they stood back in silence until he had made a
    good-sized hole in the barrier, when by order of the Princess they all
    sprang forward and thrust out their sharp thorns.

    Dorothy hopped inside the opening to escape being pricked, and Zeb and
    the Wizard, after enduring a few stabs from the thorns, were glad to
    follow her.  At once the Mangaboos began piling up the rocks of glass
    again, and as the little man realized that they were all about to be
    entombed in the mountain he said to the children:

    "My dears, what shall we do?  Jump out and fight?"

    "What's the use?" replied Dorothy.  "I'd as soon die here as live much
    longer among these cruel and heartless people."

    "That's the way I feel about it," remarked Zeb, rubbing his wounds.
    "I've had enough of the Mangaboos."

    "All right," said the Wizard; "I'm with you, whatever you decide.  But
    we can't live long in this cavern, that's certain."

    Noticing that the light was growing dim he picked up his nine piglets,
    patted each one lovingly on its fat little head, and placed them
    carefully in his inside pocket.

    Zeb struck a match and lighted one of the lanterns.  The rays of the
    colored suns were now shut out from them forever, for the last chinks
    had been filled up in the wall that separated their prison from the
    Land of the Mangaboos.

    "How big is this hole?" asked Dorothy.

    "I'll explore it and see," replied the boy.

    So he carried the lantern back for quite a distance, while Dorothy and
    the Wizard followed at his side.  The cavern did not come to an end, as
    they had expected it would, but slanted upward through the great glass
    mountain, running in a direction that promised to lead them to the side
    opposite the Mangaboo country.

    "It isn't a bad road," observed the Wizard, "and if we followed it it
    might lead us to some place that is more comfortable than this black
    pocket we are now in.  I suppose the vegetable folk were always afraid
    to enter this cavern because it is dark; but we have our lanterns to
    light the way, so I propose that we start out and discover where this
    tunnel in the mountain leads to."

    The others agreed readily to this sensible suggestion, and at once the
    boy began to harness Jim to the buggy.  When all was in readiness the
    three took their seats in the buggy and Jim started cautiously along
    the way, Zeb driving while the Wizard and Dorothy each held a lighted
    lantern so the horse could see where to go.

    Sometimes the tunnel was so narrow that the wheels of the buggy grazed
    the sides; then it would broaden out as wide as a street; but the floor
    was usually smooth, and for a long time they travelled on without any
    accident.  Jim stopped sometimes to rest, for the climb was rather
    steep and tiresome.

    "We must be nearly as high as the six colored suns, by this time," said
    Dorothy.  "I didn't know this mountain was so tall."

    "We are certainly a good distance away from the Land of the Mangaboos,"
    added Zeb; "for we have slanted away from it ever since we started."

    But they kept steadily moving, and just as Jim was about tired out with
    his long journey the way suddenly grew lighter, and Zeb put out the
    lanterns to save the oil.

    To their joy they found it was a white light that now greeted them, for
    all were weary of the colored rainbow lights which, after a time, had
    made their eyes ache with their constantly shifting rays.  The sides of
    the tunnel showed before them like the inside of a long spy-glass, and
    the floor became more level.  Jim hastened his lagging steps at this
    assurance of a quick relief from the dark passage, and in a few moments
    more they had emerged from the mountain and found themselves face to
    face with a new and charming country.




    8.  The Valley of Voices


    By journeying through the glass mountain they had reached a delightful
    valley that was shaped like the hollow of a great cup, with another
    rugged mountain showing on the other side of it, and soft and pretty
    green hills at the ends.  It was all laid out into lovely lawns and
    gardens, with pebble paths leading through them and groves of beautiful
    and stately trees dotting the landscape here and there.  There were
    orchards, too, bearing luscious fruits that are all unknown in our
    world.  Alluring brooks of crystal water flowed sparkling between their
    flower-strewn banks, while scattered over the valley were dozens of the
    quaintest and most picturesque cottages our travelers had ever beheld.
    None of them were in clusters, such as villages or towns, but each had
    ample grounds of its own, with orchards and gardens surrounding it.

    As the new arrivals gazed upon this exquisite scene they were
    enraptured by its beauties and the fragrance that permeated the soft
    air, which they breathed so gratefully after the confined atmosphere of
    the tunnel.  Several minutes were consumed in silent admiration before
    they noticed two very singular and unusual facts about this valley.
    One was that it was lighted from some unseen source; for no sun or moon
    was in the arched blue sky, although every object was flooded with a
    clear and perfect light.  The second and even more singular fact was
    the absence of any inhabitant of this splendid place.  From their
    elevated position they could overlook the entire valley, but not a
    single moving object could they see.  All appeared mysteriously
    deserted.

    The mountain on this side was not glass, but made of a stone similar to
    granite.  With some difficulty and danger Jim drew the buggy over the
    loose rocks until he reached the green lawns below, where the paths and
    orchards and gardens began.  The nearest cottage was still some
    distance away.

    "Isn't it fine?" cried Dorothy, in a joyous voice, as she sprang out of
    the buggy and let Eureka run frolicking over the velvety grass.

    "Yes, indeed!" answered Zeb.  "We were lucky to get away from those
    dreadful vegetable people."

    "It wouldn't be so bad," remarked the Wizard, gazing around him, "if we
    were obliged to live here always.  We couldn't find a prettier place,
    I'm sure."

    He took the piglets from his pocket and let them run on the grass, and
    Jim tasted a mouthful of the green blades and declared he was very
    contented in his new surroundings.

    "We can't walk in the air here, though," called Eureka, who had tried
    it and failed; but the others were satisfied to walk on the ground, and
    the Wizard said they must be nearer the surface of the earth then they
    had been in the Mangaboo country, for everything was more homelike and
    natural.

    "But where are the people?" asked Dorothy.

    The little man shook his bald head.

    "Can't imagine, my dear," he replied.

    They heard the sudden twittering of a bird, but could not find the
    creature anywhere.  Slowly they walked along the path toward the
    nearest cottage, the piglets racing and gambolling beside them and Jim
    pausing at every step for another mouthful of grass.

    Presently they came to a low plant which had broad, spreading leaves,
    in the center of which grew a single fruit about as large as a peach.
    The fruit was so daintily colored and so fragrant, and looked so
    appetizing and delicious that Dorothy stopped and exclaimed:

    "What is it, do you s'pose?"

    The piglets had smelled the fruit quickly, and before the girl could
    reach out her hand to pluck it every one of the nine tiny ones had
    rushed in and commenced to devour it with great eagerness.

    "It's good, anyway," said Zeb, "or those little rascals wouldn't have
    gobbled it up so greedily."

    "Where are they?" asked Dorothy, in astonishment.

    They all looked around, but the piglets had disappeared.

    "Dear me!" cried the Wizard; "they must have run away.  But I didn't
    see them go; did you?"

    "No!" replied the boy and the girl, together.

    "Here, - piggy, piggy, piggy!" called their master, anxiously.

    Several squeals and grunts were instantly heard at his feet, but the
    Wizard could not discover a single piglet.

    "Where are you?" he asked.

    "Why, right beside you," spoke a tiny voice.  "Can't you see us?"

    "No," answered the little man, in a puzzled tone.

    "We can see you," said another of the piglets.

    The Wizard stooped down and put out his hand, and at once felt the
    small fat body of one of his pets.  He picked it up, but could not see
    what he held.

    "It is very strange," said he, soberly.  "The piglets have become
    invisible, in some curious way."

    "I'll bet it's because they ate that peach!" cried the kitten.

    "It wasn't a peach, Eureka," said Dorothy.  "I only hope it wasn't
    poison."

    "It was fine, Dorothy," called one of the piglets.

    "We'll eat all we can find of them," said another.

    "But WE mus'n't eat them," the Wizard warned the children, "or we too
    may become invisible, and lose each other. If we come across another of
    the strange fruit we must avoid it."

    Calling the piglets to him he picked them all up, one by one, and put
    them away in his pocket; for although he could not see them he could
    feel them, and when he had buttoned his coat he knew they were safe for
    the present.

    The travellers now resumed their walk toward the cottage, which they
    presently reached.  It was a pretty place, with vines growing thickly
    over the broad front porch.  The door stood open and a table was set in
    the front room, with four chairs drawn up to it.  On the table were
    plates, knives and forks, and dishes of bread, meat and fruits.  The
    meat was smoking hot and the knives and forks were performing strange
    antics and jumping here and there in quite a puzzling way.  But not a
    single person appeared to be in the room.

    "How funny!" exclaimed Dorothy, who with Zeb and the Wizard now stood
    in the doorway.

    A peal of merry laughter answered her, and the knives and forks fell to
    the plates with a clatter.  One of the chairs pushed back from the
    table, and this was so astonishing and mysterious that Dorothy was
    almost tempted to run away in fright.

    "Here are strangers, mama!" cried the shrill and childish voice of some
    unseen person.

    "So I see, my dear," answered another voice, soft and womanly.

    "What do you want?" demanded a third voice, in a stern, gruff accent.

    "Well, well!" said the Wizard; "are there really people in this room?"

    "Of course," replied the man's voice.

    "And - pardon me for the foolish question - but, are you all invisible?"

    "Surely," the woman answered, repeating her low, rippling laughter.
    "Are you surprised that you are unable to see the people of Voe?"

    "Why, yes," stammered the Wizard.  "All the people I have ever met
    before were very plain to see."

    "Where do you come from, then?" asked the woman, in a curious tone.

    "We belong upon the face of the earth," explained the Wizard, "but
    recently, during an earthquake, we fell down a crack and landed in the
    Country of the Mangaboos."

    "Dreadful creatures!" exclaimed the woman's voice.  "I've heard of
    them."

    "They walled us up in a mountain," continued the Wizard; "but we found
    there was a tunnel through to this side, so we came here.  It is a
    beautiful place.  What do you call it?"

    "It is the Valley of Voe."

    "Thank you.  We have seen no people since we arrived, so we came to
    this house to enquire our way."

    "Are you hungry?" asked the woman's voice.

    "I could eat something," said Dorothy.

    "So could I," added Zeb.

    "But we do not wish to intrude, I assure you," the Wizard hastened to
    say.

    "That's all right," returned the man's voice, more pleasantly than
    before.  "You are welcome to what we have."

    As he spoke the voice came so near to Zeb that he jumped back in alarm.
    Two childish voices laughed merrily at this action, and Dorothy was
    sure they were in no danger among such light-hearted folks, even if
    those folks couldn't be seen.

    "What curious animal is that which is eating the grass on my lawn?"
    enquired the man's voice.

    "That's Jim," said the girl.  "He's a horse."

    "What is he good for?" was the next question.

    "He draws the buggy you see fastened to him, and we ride in the buggy
    instead of walking," she explained.

    "Can he fight?" asked the man's voice.

    "No! he can kick pretty hard with his heels, and bite a little; but Jim
    can't 'zactly fight," she replied.

    "Then the bears will get him," said one of the children's voices.

    "Bears!" exclaimed Dorothy.  "Are these bears here?"

    "That is the one evil of our country," answered the invisible man.
    "Many large and fierce bears roam in the Valley of Voe, and when they
    can catch any of us they eat us up; but as they cannot see us, we
    seldom get caught."

    "Are the bears invis'ble, too?" asked the girl.

    "Yes; for they eat of the dama-fruit, as we all do, and that keeps them
    from being seen by any eye, whether human or animal."

    "Does the dama-fruit grow on a low bush, and look something like a
    peach?" asked the Wizard.

    "Yes," was the reply.

    "If it makes you invis'ble, why do you eat it?" Dorothy enquired.

    "For two reasons, my dear," the woman's voice answered.  "The
    dama-fruit is the most delicious thing that grows, and when it makes us
    invisible the bears cannot find us to eat us up.  But now, good
    wanderers, your luncheon is on the table, so please sit down and eat as
    much as you like."




    9.  They Fight the Invisible Bears


    The strangers took their seats at the table willingly enough, for they
    were all hungry and the platters were now heaped with good things to
    eat.  In front of each place was a plate bearing one of the delicious
    dama-fruit, and the perfume that rose from these was so enticing and
    sweet that they were sorely tempted to eat of them and become invisible.

    But Dorothy satisfied her hunger with other things, and her companions
    did likewise, resisting the temptation.

    "Why do you not eat the damas?" asked the woman's voice.

    "We don't want to get invis'ble," answered the girl.

    "But if you remain visible the bears will see you and devour you," said
    a girlish young voice, that belonged to one of the children.  "We who
    live here much prefer to be invisible; for we can still hug and kiss
    one another, and are quite safe from the bears."

    "And we do not have to be so particular about our dress," remarked the
    man.

    "And mama can't tell whether my face is dirty or not!" added the other
    childish voice, gleefully.

    "But I make you wash it, every time I think of it," said the mother;
    "for it stands to reason your face is dirty, Ianu, whether I can see it
    or not."

    Dorothy laughed and stretched out her hands.

    "Come here, please - Ianu and your sister - and let me feel of you," she
    requested.

    They came to her willingly, and Dorothy passed her hands over their
    faces and forms and decided one was a girl of about her own age and the
    other a boy somewhat smaller.  The girl's hair was soft and fluffy and
    her skin as smooth as satin.  When Dorothy gently touched her nose and
    ears and lips they seemed to be well and delicately formed.

    "If I could see you I am sure you would be beautiful," she declared.

    The girl laughed, and her mother said:

    "We are not vain in the Valley of Voe, because we can not display our
    beauty, and good actions and pleasant ways are what make us lovely to
    our companions.  Yet we can see and appreciate the beauties of nature,
    the dainty flowers and trees, the green fields and the clear blue of
    the sky."

    "How about the birds and beasts and fishes?" asked Zeb.

    "The birds we cannot see, because they love to eat of the damas as much
    as we do; yet we hear their sweet songs and enjoy them.  Neither can we
    see the cruel bears, for they also eat the fruit.  But the fishes that
    swim in our brooks we can see, and often we catch them to eat."

    "It occurs to me you have a great deal to make you happy, even while
    invisible," remarked the Wizard.  "Nevertheless, we prefer to remain
    visible while we are in your valley."

    Just then Eureka came in, for she had been until now wandering outside
    with Jim; and when the kitten saw the table set with food she cried out:

    "Now you must feed me, Dorothy, for I'm half starved."

    The children were inclined to be frightened by the sight of the small
    animal, which reminded them of the bears; but Dorothy reassured them by
    explaining that Eureka was a pet and could do no harm even if she
    wished to.  Then, as the others had by this time moved away from the
    table, the kitten sprang upon the chair and put her paws upon the cloth
    to see what there was to eat.  To her surprise an unseen hand clutched
    her and held her suspended in the air.  Eureka was frantic with terror,
    and tried to scratch and bite, so the next moment she was dropped to
    the floor.

    "Did you see that, Dorothy?" she gasped.

    "Yes, dear," her mistress replied; "there are people living in this
    house, although we cannot see them.  And you must have better manners,
    Eureka, or something worse will happen to you."

    She placed a plate of food upon the floor and the kitten ate greedily.

    "Give me that nice-smelling fruit I saw on the table," she begged, when
    she had cleaned the plate.

    "Those are damas," said Dorothy, "and you must never even taste them,
    Eureka, or you'll get invis'ble, and then we can't see you at all."

    The kitten gazed wistfully at the forbidden fruit.

    "Does it hurt to be invis'ble?" she asked.

    "I don't know," Dorothy answered; "but it would hurt me dre'fully to
    lose you."

    "Very well, I won't touch it," decided the kitten; "but you must keep
    it away from me, for the smell is very tempting."

    "Can you tell us, sir or ma'am," said the Wizard, addressing the air
    because he did not quite know where the unseen people stood, "if there
    is any way we can get out of your beautiful Valley, and on top of the
    Earth again."

    "Oh, one can leave the Valley easily enough," answered the man's voice;
    "but to do so you must enter a far less pleasant country.  As for
    reaching the top of the earth, I have never heard that it is possible
    to do that, and if you succeeded in getting there you would probably
    fall off."

    "Oh, no," said Dorothy, "we've been there, and we know."

    "The Valley of Voe is certainly a charming place," resumed the Wizard;
    "but we cannot be contented in any other land than our own, for long.
    Even if we should come to unpleasant places on our way it is necessary,
    in order to reach the earth's surface, to keep moving on toward it."

    "In that case," said the man, "it will be best for you to cross our
    Valley and mount the spiral staircase inside the Pyramid Mountain.  The
    top of that mountain is lost in the clouds, and when you reach it you
    will be in the awful Land of Naught, where the Gargoyles live."

    "What are Gargoyles?" asked Zeb.

    "I do not know, young sir.  Our greatest Champion, Overman-Anu, once
    climbed the spiral stairway and fought nine days with the Gargoyles
    before he could escape them and come back; but he could never be
    induced to describe the dreadful creatures, and soon afterward a bear
    caught him and ate him up."

    The wanders were rather discouraged by this gloomy report, but Dorothy
    said with a sigh:

    "If the only way to get home is to meet the Gurgles, then we've got to
    meet 'em.  They can't be worse than the Wicked Witch or the Nome King."

    "But you must remember you had the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman to
    help you conquer those enemies," suggested the Wizard.  "Just now, my
    dear, there is not a single warrior in your company."

    "Oh, I guess Zeb could fight if he had to.  Couldn't you, Zeb?" asked
    the little girl.

    "Perhaps; if I had to," answered Zeb, doubtfully.

    "And you have the jointed sword that you chopped the veg'table Sorcerer
    in two with," the girl said to the little man.

    "True," he replied; "and in my satchel are other useful things to fight
    with."

    "What the Gargoyles most dread is a noise," said the man's voice.  "Our
    Champion told me that when he shouted his battle-cry the creatures
    shuddered and drew back, hesitating to continue the combat.  But they
    were in great numbers, and the Champion could not shout much because he
    had to save his breath for fighting."

    "Very good," said the Wizard; "we can all yell better than we can
    fight, so we ought to defeat the Gargoyles."

    "But tell me," said Dorothy, "how did such a brave Champion happen to
    let the bears eat him?  And if he was invis'ble, and the bears
    invis'ble, who knows that they really ate him up?"

    "The Champion had killed eleven bears in his time," returned the unseen
    man; "and we know this is true because when any creature is dead the
    invisible charm of the dama-fruit ceases to be active, and the slain
    one can be plainly seen by all eyes.  When the Champion killed a bear
    everyone could see it; and when the bears killed the Champion we all
    saw several pieces of him scattered about, which of course disappeared
    again when the bears devoured them."

    They now bade farewell to the kind but unseen people of the cottage,
    and after the man had called their attention to a high, pyramid-shaped
    mountain on the opposite side of the Valley, and told them how to
    travel in order to reach it, they again started upon their journey.

    They followed the course of a broad stream and passed several more
    pretty cottages; but of course they saw no one, nor did any one speak
    to them.  Fruits and flowers grew plentifully all about, and there were
    many of the delicious damas that the people of Voe were so fond of.

    About noon they stopped to allow Jim to rest in the shade of a pretty
    orchard, and while they plucked and ate some of the cherries and plums
    that grew there a soft voice suddenly said to them:

    "There are bears near by.  Be careful."

    The Wizard got out his sword at once, and Zeb grabbed the horse-whip.
    Dorothy climbed into the buggy, although Jim had been unharnessed from
    it and was grazing some distance away.

    The owner of the unseen voice laughed lightly and said:

    "You cannot escape the bears that way."

    "How CAN we 'scape?" asked Dorothy, nervously, for an unseen danger is
    always the hardest to face.

    "You must take to the river," was the reply.  "The bears will not
    venture upon the water."

    "But we would be drowned!" exclaimed the girl.

    "Oh, there is no need of that," said the voice, which from its gentle
    tones seemed to belong to a young girl.  "You are strangers in the
    Valley of Voe, and do not seem to know our ways; so I will try to save
    you."

    The next moment a broad-leaved plant was jerked from the ground where
    it grew and held suspended in the air before the Wizard.

    "Sir," said the voice, "you must rub these leaves upon the soles of all
    your feet, and then you will be able to walk upon the water without
    sinking below the surface.  It is a secret the bears do not know, and
    we people of Voe usually walk upon the water when we travel, and so
    escape our enemies."

    "Thank you!" cried the Wizard, joyfully, and at once rubbed a leaf upon
    the soles of Dorothy's shoes and then upon his own.  The girl took a
    leaf and rubbed it upon the kitten's paws, and the rest of the plant
    was handed to Zeb, who, after applying it to his own feet, carefully
    rubbed it upon all four of Jim's hoofs and then upon the tires of the
    buggy-wheels.  He had nearly finished this last task when a low
    growling was suddenly heard and the horse began to jump around and kick
    viciously with his heels.

    "Quick!  To the water or you are lost!" cried their unseen friend, and
    without hesitation the Wizard drew the buggy down the bank and out upon
    the broad river, for Dorothy was still seated in it with Eureka in her
    arms.  They did not sink at all, owing to the virtues of the strange
    plant they had used, and when the buggy was in the middle of the stream
    the Wizard returned to the bank to assist Zeb and Jim.

    The horse was plunging madly about, and two or three deep gashes
    appeared upon its flanks, from which the blood flowed freely.

    "Run for the river!" shouted the Wizard, and Jim quickly freed himself
    from his unseen tormenters by a few vicious kicks and then obeyed.  As
    soon as he trotted out upon the surface of the river he found himself
    safe from pursuit, and Zeb was already running across the water toward
    Dorothy.

    As the little Wizard turned to follow them he felt a hot breath against
    his cheek and heard a low, fierce growl.  At once he began stabbing at
    the air with his sword, and he knew that he had struck some substance
    because when he drew back the blade it was dripping with blood.  The
    third time that he thrust out the weapon there was a loud roar and a
    fall, and suddenly at his feet appeared the form of a great red bear,
    which was nearly as big as the horse and much stronger and fiercer.
    The beast was quite dead from the sword thrusts, and after a glance at
    its terrible claws and sharp teeth the little man turned in a panic and
    rushed out upon the water, for other menacing growls told him more
    bears were near.

    On the river, however, the adventurers seemed to be perfectly safe.
    Dorothy and the buggy had floated slowly down stream with the current
    of the water, and the others made haste to join her.  The Wizard opened
    his satchel and got out some sticking-plaster with which he mended the
    cuts Jim had received from the claws of the bears.

    "I think we'd better stick to the river, after this," said Dorothy.
    "If our unknown friend hadn't warned us, and told us what to do, we
    would all be dead by this time."

    "That is true," agreed the Wizard, "and as the river seems to be
    flowing in the direction of the Pyramid Mountain it will be the easiest
    way for us to travel."

    Zeb hitched Jim to the buggy again, and the horse trotted along and
    drew them rapidly over the smooth water.  The kitten was at first
    dreadfully afraid of getting wet, but Dorothy let her down and soon
    Eureka was frisking along beside the buggy without being scared a bit.
    Once a little fish swam too near the surface, and the kitten grabbed it
    in her mouth and ate it up as quick as a wink; but Dorothy cautioned
    her to be careful what she ate in this valley of enchantments, and no
    more fishes were careless enough to swim within reach.

    After a journey of several hours they came to a point where the river
    curved, and they found they must cross a mile or so of the Valley
    before they came to the Pyramid Mountain.  There were few houses in
    this part, and few orchards or flowers; so our friends feared they
    might encounter more of the savage bears, which they had learned to
    dread with all their hearts.

    "You'll have to make a dash, Jim," said the Wizard, "and run as fast as
    you can go."

    "All right," answered the horse; "I'll do my best.  But you must
    remember I'm old, and my dashing days are past and gone."

    All three got into the buggy and Zeb picked up the reins, though Jim
    needed no guidance of any sort.  The horse was still smarting from the
    sharp claws of the invisible bears, and as soon as he was on land and
    headed toward the mountain the thought that more of those fearsome
    creatures might be near acted as a spur and sent him galloping along in
    a way that made Dorothy catch her breath.

    Then Zeb, in a spirit of mischief, uttered a growl like that of the
    bears, and Jim pricked up his ears and fairly flew.  His boney legs
    moved so fast they could scarcely be seen, and the Wizard clung fast to
    the seat and yelled "Whoa!" at the top of his voice.

    "I - I'm 'fraid he's - he's running away!" gasped Dorothy.

    "I KNOW he is," said Zeb; "but no bear can catch him if he keeps up
    that gait - and the harness or the buggy don't break."

    Jim did not make a mile a minute; but almost before they were aware of
    it he drew up at the foot of the mountain, so suddenly that the Wizard
    and Zeb both sailed over the dashboard and landed in the soft
    grass - where they rolled over several times before they stopped.
    Dorothy nearly went with them, but she was holding fast to the iron
    rail of the seat, and that saved her.  She squeezed the kitten, though,
    until it screeched; and then the old cab-horse made several curious
    sounds that led the little girl to suspect he was laughing at them all.




    10.  The Braided Man of Pyramid Mountain


    The mountain before them was shaped like a cone and was so tall that
    its point was lost in the clouds.  Directly facing the place where Jim
    had stopped was an arched opening leading to a broad stairway.  The
    stairs were cut in the rock inside the mountain, and they were broad
    and not very steep, because they circled around like a cork-screw, and
    at the arched opening where the flight began the circle was quite big.
    At the foot of the stairs was a sign reading:

    WARNING.  These steps lead to the Land of the Gargoyles.  DANGER!  KEEP
    OUT.


    "I wonder how Jim is ever going to draw the buggy up so many stairs,"
    said Dorothy, gravely.

    "No trouble at all," declared the horse, with a contemptuous neigh.
    "Still, I don't care to drag any passengers.  You'll all have to walk."

    "Suppose the stairs get steeper?" suggested Zeb, doubtfully.

    "Then you'll have to boost the buggy-wheels, that's all," answered Jim.

    "We'll try it, anyway," said the Wizard.  "It's the only way to get out
    of the Valley of Voe."

    So they began to ascend the stairs, Dorothy and the Wizard first, Jim
    next, drawing the buggy, and then Zeb to watch that nothing happened to
    the harness.

    The light was dim, and soon they mounted into total darkness, so that
    the Wizard was obliged to get out his lanterns to light the way.  But
    this enabled them to proceed steadily until they came to a landing
    where there was a rift in the side of the mountain that let in both
    light and air.  Looking through this opening they could see the Valley
    of Voe lying far below them, the cottages seeming like toy houses from
    that distance.

    After resting a few moments they resumed their climb, and still the
    stairs were broad and low enough for Jim to draw the buggy easily after
    him.  The old horse panted a little, and had to stop often to get his
    breath.  At such times they were all glad to wait for him, for
    continually climbing up stairs is sure to make one's legs ache.

    They wound about, always going upward, for some time.  The lights from
    the lanterns dimly showed the way, but it was a gloomy journey, and
    they were pleased when a broad streak of light ahead assured them they
    were coming to a second landing.

    Here one side of the mountain had a great hole in it, like the mouth of
    a cavern, and the stairs stopped at the near edge of the floor and
    commenced ascending again at the opposite edge.

    The opening in the mountain was on the side opposite to the Valley of
    Voe, and our travellers looked out upon a strange scene.  Below them
    was a vast space, at the bottom of which was a black sea with rolling
    billows, through which little tongues of flame constantly shot up.
    Just above them, and almost on a level with their platform, were banks
    of rolling clouds which constantly shifted position and changed color.
    The blues and greys were very beautiful, and Dorothy noticed that on
    the cloud banks sat or reclined fleecy, shadowy forms of beautiful
    beings who must have been the Cloud Fairies.  Mortals who stand upon
    the earth and look up at the sky cannot often distinguish these forms,
    but our friends were now so near to the clouds that they observed the
    dainty fairies very clearly.

    "Are they real?" asked Zeb, in an awed voice.

    "Of course," replied Dorothy, softly.  "They are the Cloud Fairies."

    "They seem like open-work," remarked the boy, gazing intently.  "If I
    should squeeze one, there wouldn't be anything left of it."

    In the open space between the clouds and the black, bubbling sea far
    beneath, could be seen an occasional strange bird winging its way
    swiftly through the air.  These birds were of enormous size, and
    reminded Zeb of the rocs he had read about in the Arabian Nights.  They
    had fierce eyes and sharp talons and beaks, and the children hoped none
    of them would venture into the cavern.

    "Well, I declare!" suddenly exclaimed the little Wizard.  "What in the
    world is this?"

    They turned around and found a man standing on the floor in the center
    of the cave, who bowed very politely when he saw he had attracted their
    attention.  He was a very old man, bent nearly double; but the queerest
    thing about him was his white hair and beard.  These were so long that
    they reached to his feet, and both the hair and the beard were
    carefully plaited into many braids, and the end of each braid fastened
    with a bow of colored ribbon.

    "Where did you come from?" asked Dorothy, wonderingly.

    "No place at all," answered the man with the braids; "that is, not
    recently.  Once I lived on top the earth, but for many years I have had
    my factory in this spot - half way up Pyramid Mountain."

    "Are we only half way up?" enquired the boy, in a discouraged tone.

    "I believe so, my lad," replied the braided man.  "But as I have never
    been in either direction, down or up, since I arrived, I cannot be
    positive whether it is exactly half way or not."

    "Have you a factory in this place?" asked the Wizard, who had been
    examining the strange personage carefully.

    "To be sure," said the other.  "I am a great inventor, you must know,
    and I manufacture my products in this lonely spot."

    "What are your products?" enquired the Wizard.

    "Well, I make Assorted Flutters for flags and bunting, and a superior
    grade of Rustles for ladies' silk gowns."

    "I thought so," said the Wizard, with a sigh.  "May we examine some of
    these articles?"

    "Yes, indeed; come into my shop, please," and the braided man turned
    and led the way into a smaller cave, where he evidently lived.  Here,
    on a broad shelf, were several card-board boxes of various sizes, each
    tied with cotton cord.

    "This," said the man, taking up a box and handling it gently, "contains
    twelve dozen rustles - enough to last any lady a year.  Will you buy
    it, my dear?" he asked, addressing Dorothy.

    "My gown isn't silk," she said, smiling.

    "Never mind.  When you open the box the rustles will escape, whether
    you are wearing a silk dress or not," said the man, seriously.  Then he
    picked up another box.  "In this," he continued, "are many assorted
    flutters.  They are invaluable to make flags flutter on a still day,
    when there is no wind.  You, sir," turning to the Wizard, "ought to
    have this assortment.  Once you have tried my goods I am sure you will
    never be without them."

    "I have no money with me," said the Wizard, evasively.

    "I do not want money," returned the braided man, "for I could not spend
    it in this deserted place if I had it.  But I would like very much a
    blue hair-ribbon.  You will notice my braids are tied with yellow,
    pink, brown, red, green, white and black; but I have no blue ribbons."

    "I'll get you one!" cried Dorothy, who was sorry for the poor man; so
    she ran back to the buggy and took from her suit-case a pretty blue
    ribbon.  It did her good to see how the braided man's eyes sparkled
    when he received this treasure.

    "You have made me very, very happy, my dear!" he exclaimed; and then he
    insisted on the Wizard taking the box of flutters and the little girl
    accepting the box of rustles.

    "You may need them, some time," he said, "and there is really no use in
    my manufacturing these things unless somebody uses them."

    "Why did you leave the surface of the earth?" enquired the Wizard.

    "I could not help it.  It is a sad story, but if you will try to
    restrain your tears I will tell you about it.  On earth I was a
    manufacturer of Imported Holes for American Swiss Cheese, and I will
    acknowledge that I supplied a superior article, which was in great
    demand.  Also I made pores for porous plasters and high-grade holes for
    doughnuts and buttons.  Finally I invented a new Adjustable Post-hole,
    which I thought would make my fortune.  I manufactured a large quantity
    of these post-holes, and having no room in which to store them I set
    them all end to end and put the top one in the ground.  That made an
    extraordinary long hole, as you may imagine, and reached far down into
    the earth; and, as I leaned over it to try to see to the bottom, I lost
    my balance and tumbled in.  Unfortunately, the hole led directly into
    the vast space you see outside this mountain; but I managed to catch a
    point of rock that projected from this cavern, and so saved myself from
    tumbling headlong into the black waves beneath, where the tongues of
    flame that dart out would certainly have consumed me.  Here, then, I
    made my home; and although it is a lonely place I amuse myself making
    rustles and flutters, and so get along very nicely."

    When the braided man had completed this strange tale Dorothy nearly
    laughed, because it was all so absurd; but the Wizard tapped his
    forehead significantly, to indicate that he thought the poor man was
    crazy.  So they politely bade him good day, and went back to the outer
    cavern to resume their journey.




    11.  They Meet the Wooden Gargoyles


    Another breathless climb brought our adventurers to a third landing
    where there was a rift in the mountain.  On peering out all they could
    see was rolling banks of clouds, so thick that they obscured all else.

    But the travellers were obliged to rest, and while they were sitting on
    the rocky floor the Wizard felt in his pocket and brought out the nine
    tiny piglets.  To his delight they were now plainly visible, which
    proved that they had passed beyond the influence of the magical Valley
    of Voe.

    "Why, we can see each other again!" cried one, joyfully.

    "Yes," sighed Eureka; "and I also can see you again, and the sight
    makes me dreadfully hungry.  Please, Mr. Wizard, may I eat just one of
    the fat little piglets?  You'd never miss ONE of them, I'm sure!"

    "What a horrid, savage beast!" exclaimed a piglet; "and after we've
    been such good friends, too, and played with one another!"

    "When I'm not hungry, I love to play with you all," said the kitten,
    demurely; "but when my stomach is empty it seems that nothing would
    fill it so nicely as a fat piglet."

    "And we trusted you so!" said another of the nine, reproachfully.

    "And thought you were respectable!" said another.

    "It seems we were mistaken," declared a third, looking at the kitten
    timorously, "no one with such murderous desires should belong to our
    party, I'm sure."

    "You see, Eureka," remarked Dorothy, reprovingly, "you are making
    yourself disliked.  There are certain things proper for a kitten to
    eat; but I never heard of a kitten eating a pig, under ANY cir'stances."

    "Did you ever see such little pigs before?" asked the kitten.  "They
    are no bigger than mice, and I'm sure mice are proper for me to eat."

    "It isn't the bigness, dear; its the variety," replied the girl.
    "These are Mr. Wizard's pets, just as you are my pet, and it wouldn't
    be any more proper for you to eat them than it would be for Jim to eat
    you."

    "And that's just what I shall do if you don't let those little balls of
    pork alone," said Jim, glaring at the kitten with his round, big eyes.
    "If you injure any one of them I'll chew you up instantly."

    The kitten looked at the horse thoughtfully, as if trying to decide
    whether he meant it or not.

    "In that case," she said, "I'll leave them alone.  You haven't many
    teeth left, Jim, but the few you have are sharp enough to make me
    shudder.  So the piglets will be perfectly safe, hereafter, as far as I
    am concerned."

    "That is right, Eureka," remarked the Wizard, earnestly.  "Let us all
    be a happy family and love one another."

    Eureka yawned and stretched herself.

    "I've always loved the piglets," she said; "but they don't love me."

    "No one can love a person he's afraid of," asserted Dorothy.  "If you
    behave, and don't scare the little pigs, I'm sure they'll grow very
    fond of you."

    The Wizard now put the nine tiny ones back into his pocket and the
    journey was resumed.

    "We must be pretty near the top, now," said the boy, as they climbed
    wearily up the dark, winding stairway.

    "The Country of the Gurgles can't be far from the top of the earth,"
    remarked Dorothy.  "It isn't very nice down here.  I'd like to get home
    again, I'm sure."

    No one replied to this, because they found they needed all their breath
    for the climb.  The stairs had become narrower and Zeb and the Wizard
    often had to help Jim pull the buggy from one step to another, or keep
    it from jamming against the rocky walls.

    At last, however, a dim light appeared ahead of them, which grew
    clearer and stronger as they advanced.

    "Thank goodness we're nearly there!" panted the little Wizard.

    Jim, who was in advance, saw the last stair before him and stuck his
    head above the rocky sides of the stairway.  Then he halted, ducked
    down and began to back up, so that he nearly fell with the buggy onto
    the others.

    "Let's go down again!" he said, in his hoarse voice.

    "Nonsense!" snapped the tired Wizard.  "What's the matter with you, old
    man?"

    "Everything," grumbled the horse.  "I've taken a look at this place,
    and it's no fit country for real creatures to go to.  Everything's
    dead, up there - no flesh or blood or growing thing anywhere."

    "Never mind; we can't turn back," said Dorothy; "and we don't intend to
    stay there, anyhow."

    "It's dangerous," growled Jim, in a stubborn tone.

    "See here, my good steed," broke in the Wizard, "little Dorothy and I
    have been in many queer countries in our travels, and always escaped
    without harm.  We've even been to the marvelous Land of Oz - haven't we,
    Dorothy? - so we don't much care what the Country of the Gargoyles is
    like.  Go ahead, Jim, and whatever happens we'll make the best of it."

    "All right," answered the horse; "this is your excursion, and not mine;
    so if you get into trouble don't blame me."

    With this speech he bent forward and dragged the buggy up the remaining
    steps.  The others followed and soon they were all standing upon a
    broad platform and gazing at the most curious and startling sight their
    eyes had ever beheld.

    "The Country of the Gargoyles is all wooden!" exclaimed Zeb; and so it
    was.  The ground was sawdust and the pebbles scattered around were hard
    knots from trees, worn smooth in course of time.  There were odd wooden
    houses, with carved wooden flowers in the front yards.  The tree-trunks
    were of coarse wood, but the leaves of the trees were shavings.  The
    patches of grass were splinters of wood, and where neither grass nor
    sawdust showed was a solid wooden flooring.  Wooden birds fluttered
    among the trees and wooden cows were browsing upon the wooden grass;
    but the most amazing things of all were the wooden people - the
    creatures known as Gargoyles.

    These were very numerous, for the place was thickly inhabited, and a
    large group of the queer people clustered near, gazing sharply upon the
    strangers who had emerged from the long spiral stairway.

    The Gargoyles were very small of stature, being less than three feet in
    height.  Their bodies were round, their legs short and thick and their
    arms extraordinarily long and stout.  Their heads were too big for
    their bodies and their faces were decidedly ugly to look upon.  Some
    had long, curved noses and chins, small eyes and wide, grinning mouths.
    Others had flat noses, protruding eyes, and ears that were shaped like
    those of an elephant.  There were many types, indeed, scarcely two
    being alike; but all were equally disagreeable in appearance.  The tops
    of their heads had no hair, but were carved into a variety of fantastic
    shapes, some having a row of points or balls around the top, others
    designs resembling flowers or vegetables, and still others having
    squares that looked like waffles cut criss-cross on their heads.  They
    all wore short wooden wings which were fastened to their wooden bodies
    by means of wooden hinges with wooden screws, and with these wings they
    flew swiftly and noiselessly here and there, their legs being of little
    use to them.

    This noiseless motion was one of the most peculiar things about the
    Gargoyles.  They made no sounds at all, either in flying or trying to
    speak, and they conversed mainly by means of quick signals made with
    their wooden fingers or lips.  Neither was there any sound to be heard
    anywhere throughout the wooden country.  The birds did not sing, nor
    did the cows moo; yet there was more than ordinary activity everywhere.

    The group of these queer creatures which was discovered clustered near
    the stairs at first remained staring and motionless, glaring with evil
    eyes at the intruders who had so suddenly appeared in their land.  In
    turn the Wizard and the children, the horse and the kitten, examined
    the Gargoyles with the same silent attention.

    "There's going to be trouble, I'm sure," remarked the horse.  "Unhitch
    those tugs, Zeb, and set me free from the buggy, so I can fight
    comfortably."

    "Jim's right," sighed the Wizard.  "There's going to be trouble, and my
    sword isn't stout enough to cut up those wooden bodies - so I shall have
    to get out my revolvers."

    He got his satchel from the buggy and, opening it, took out two deadly
    looking revolvers that made the children shrink back in alarm just to
    look at.

    "What harm can the Gurgles do?" asked Dorothy.  "They have no weapons
    to hurt us with."

    "Each of their arms is a wooden club," answered the little man, "and
    I'm sure the creatures mean mischief, by the looks of their eyes.  Even
    these revolvers can merely succeed in damaging a few of their wooden
    bodies, and after that we will be at their mercy."

    "But why fight at all, in that case?" asked the girl.

    "So I may die with a clear conscience," returned the Wizard, gravely.
    "It's every man's duty to do the best he knows how; and I'm going to do
    it."

    "Wish I had an axe," said Zeb, who by now had unhitched the horse.

    "If we had known we were coming we might have brought along several
    other useful things," responded the Wizard.  "But we dropped into this
    adventure rather unexpectedly."

    The Gargoyles had backed away a distance when they heard the sound of
    talking, for although our friends had spoken in low tones their words
    seemed loud in the silence surrounding them.  But as soon as the
    conversation ceased, the grinning, ugly creatures arose in a flock and
    flew swiftly toward the strangers, their long arms stretched out before
    them like the bowsprits of a fleet of sail-boats.  The horse had
    especially attracted their notice, because it was the biggest and
    strangest creature they had ever seen; so it became the center of their
    first attack.

    But Jim was ready for them, and when he saw them coming he turned his
    heels toward them and began kicking out as hard as he could.  Crack!
    crash! bang! went his iron-shod hoofs against the wooden bodies of the
    Gargoyles, and they were battered right and left with such force that
    they scattered like straws in the wind.  But the noise and clatter
    seemed as dreadful to them as Jim's heels, for all who were able
    swiftly turned and flew away to a great distance.  The others picked
    themselves up from the ground one by one and quickly rejoined their
    fellows, so for a moment the horse thought he had won the fight with
    ease.

    But the Wizard was not so confident.

    "Those wooden things are impossible to hurt," he said, "and all the
    damage Jim has done to them is to knock a few splinters from their
    noses and ears.  That cannot make them look any uglier, I'm sure, and
    it is my opinion they will soon renew the attack."

    "What made them fly away?" asked Dorothy.

    "The noise, of course.  Don't you remember how the Champion escaped
    them by shouting his battle-cry?"

    "Suppose we escape down the stairs, too," suggested the boy.  "We have
    time, just now, and I'd rather face the invis'ble bears than those
    wooden imps."

    "No," returned Dorothy, stoutly, "it won't do to go back, for then we
    would never get home.  Let's fight it out."

    "That is what I advise," said the Wizard.  "They haven't defeated us
    yet, and Jim is worth a whole army."

    But the Gargoyles were clever enough not to attack the horse the next
    time.  They advanced in a great swarm, having been joined by many more
    of their kind, and they flew straight over Jim's head to where the
    others were standing.

    The Wizard raised one of his revolvers and fired into the throng of his
    enemies, and the shot resounded like a clap of thunder in that silent
    place.

    Some of the wooden beings fell flat upon the ground, where they
    quivered and trembled in every limb; but most of them managed to wheel
    and escape again to a distance.

    Zeb ran and picked up one of the Gargoyles that lay nearest to him.
    The top of its head was carved into a crown and the Wizard's bullet had
    struck it exactly in the left eye, which was a hard wooden knot.  Half
    of the bullet stuck in the wood and half stuck out, so it had been the
    jar and the sudden noise that had knocked the creature down, more than
    the fact that it was really hurt.  Before this crowned Gargoyle had
    recovered himself Zeb had wound a strap several times around its body,
    confining its wings and arms so that it could not move.  Then, having
    tied the wooden creature securely, the boy buckled the strap and tossed
    his prisoner into the buggy.  By that time the others had all retired.




    12.  A Wonderful Escape


    For a while the enemy hesitated to renew the attack.  Then a few of
    them advanced until another shot from the Wizard's revolver made them
    retreat.

    "That's fine," said Zeb.  "We've got 'em on the run now, sure enough."

    "But only for a time," replied the Wizard, shaking his head gloomily.
    "These revolvers are good for six shots each, but when those are gone
    we shall be helpless."

    The Gargoyles seemed to realize this, for they sent a few of their band
    time after time to attack the strangers and draw the fire from the
    little man's revolvers.  In this way none of them was shocked by the
    dreadful report more than once, for the main band kept far away and
    each time a new company was sent into the battle.  When the Wizard had
    fired all of his twelve bullets he had caused no damage to the enemy
    except to stun a few by the noise, and so be as no nearer to victory
    than in the beginning of the fray.

    "What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy, anxiously.

    "Let's yell - all together," said Zeb.

    "And fight at the same time," added the Wizard.  "We will get near Jim,
    so that he can help us, and each one must take some weapon and do the
    best he can.  I'll use my sword, although it isn't much account in this
    affair.  Dorothy must take her parasol and open it suddenly when the
    wooden folks attack her.  I haven't anything for you, Zeb."

    "I'll use the king," said the boy, and pulled his prisoner out of the
    buggy.  The bound Gargoyle's arms extended far out beyond its head, so
    by grasping its wrists Zeb found the king made a very good club.  The
    boy was strong for one of his years, having always worked upon a farm;
    so he was likely to prove more dangerous to the enemy than the Wizard.

    When the next company of Gargoyles advanced, our adventurers began
    yelling as if they had gone mad.  Even the kitten gave a dreadfully
    shrill scream and at the same time Jim the cab-horse neighed loudly.
    This daunted the enemy for a time, but the defenders were soon out of
    breath.  Perceiving this, as well as the fact that there were no more
    of the awful "bangs" to come from the revolvers, the Gargoyles advanced
    in a swarm as thick as bees, so that the air was filled with them.

    Dorothy squatted upon the ground and put up her parasol, which nearly
    covered her and proved a great protection.  The Wizard's sword-blade
    snapped into a dozen pieces at the first blow he struck against the
    wooden people.  Zeb pounded away with the Gargoyle he was using as a
    club until he had knocked down dozens of foes; but at the last they
    clustered so thickly about him that he no longer had room in which to
    swing his arms.  The horse performed some wonderful kicking and even
    Eureka assisted when she leaped bodily upon the Gargoyles and scratched
    and bit at them like a wild-cat.

    But all this bravery amounted to nothing at all.  The wooden things
    wound their long arms around Zeb and the Wizard and held them fast.
    Dorothy was captured in the same way, and numbers of the Gargoyles
    clung to Jim's legs, so weighting him down that the poor beast was
    helpless.  Eureka made a desperate dash to escape and scampered along
    the ground like a streak; but a grinning Gargoyle flew after her and
    grabbed her before she had gone very far.

    All of them expected nothing less than instant death; but to their
    surprise the wooden creatures flew into the air with them and bore them
    far away, over miles and miles of wooden country, until they came to a
    wooden city.  The houses of this city had many corners, being square
    and six-sided and eight-sided.  They were tower-like in shape and the
    best of them seemed old and weather-worn; yet all were strong and
    substantial.

    To one of these houses which had neither doors nor windows, but only
    one broad opening far up underneath the roof, the prisoners were
    brought by their captors.  The Gargoyles roughly pushed them into the
    opening, where there was a platform, and then flew away and left them.
    As they had no wings the strangers could not fly away, and if they
    jumped down from such a height they would surely be killed.  The
    creatures had sense enough to reason that way, and the only mistake
    they made was in supposing the earth people were unable to overcome
    such ordinary difficulties.

    Jim was brought with the others, although it took a good many Gargoyles
    to carry the big beast through the air and land him on the high
    platform, and the buggy was thrust in after him because it belonged to
    the party and the wooden folks had no idea what it was used for or
    whether it was alive or not.  When Eureka's captor had thrown the
    kitten after the others the last Gargoyle silently disappeared, leaving
    our friends to breathe freely once more.

    "What an awful fight!" said Dorothy, catching her breath in little
    gasps.

    "Oh, I don't know," purred Eureka, smoothing her ruffled fur with her
    paw; "we didn't manage to hurt anybody, and nobody managed to hurt us."

    "Thank goodness we are together again, even if we are prisoners,"
    sighed the little girl.

    "I wonder why they didn't kill us on the spot," remarked Zeb, who had
    lost his king in the struggle.

    "They are probably keeping us for some ceremony," the Wizard answered,
    reflectively; "but there is no doubt they intend to kill us as dead as
    possible in a short time."

    "As dead as poss'ble would be pretty dead, wouldn't it?" asked Dorothy.

    "Yes, my dear.  But we have no need to worry about that just now.  Let
    us examine our prison and see what it is like."

    The space underneath the roof, where they stood, permitted them to see
    on all sides of the tall building, and they looked with much curiosity
    at the city spread out beneath them.  Everything visible was made of
    wood, and the scene seemed stiff and extremely unnatural.

    From their platform a stair descended into the house, and the children
    and the Wizard explored it after lighting a lantern to show them the
    way.  Several stories of empty rooms rewarded their search, but nothing
    more;  so after a time they came back to the platform again.  Had there
    been any doors or windows in the lower rooms, or had not the boards of
    the house been so thick and stout, escape could have been easy; but to
    remain down below was like being in a cellar or the hold of a ship, and
    they did not like the darkness or the damp smell.

    In this country, as in all others they had visited underneath the
    earth's surface, there was no night, a constant and strong light coming
    from some unknown source.  Looking out, they could see into some of the
    houses near them, where there were open windows in abundance, and were
    able to mark the forms of the wooden Gargoyles moving about in their
    dwellings.

    "This seems to be their time of rest," observed the Wizard.  "All
    people need rest, even if they are made of wood, and as there is no
    night here they select a certain time of the day in which to sleep or
    doze."

    "I feel sleepy myself," remarked Zeb, yawning.

    "Why, where's Eureka?" cried Dorothy, suddenly.

    They all looked around, but the kitten was no place to be seen.

    "She's gone out for a walk," said Jim, gruffly.

    "Where?  On the roof?" asked the girl.

    "No; she just dug her claws into the wood and climbed down the sides of
    this house to the ground."

    "She couldn't climb DOWN, Jim," said Dorothy.  "To climb means to go
    up."

    "Who said so?" demanded the horse.

    "My school-teacher said so; and she knows a lot, Jim."

    "To 'climb down' is sometimes used as a figure of speech," remarked the
    Wizard.

    "Well, this was a figure of a cat," said Jim, "and she WENT down,
    anyhow, whether she climbed or crept."

    "Dear me! how careless Eureka is," exclaimed the girl, much distressed.
    "The Gurgles will get her, sure!"

    "Ha, ha!" chuckled the old cab-horse; "they're not 'Gurgles,' little
    maid; they're Gargoyles."

    "Never mind; they'll get Eureka, whatever they're called."

    "No they won't," said the voice of the kitten, and Eureka herself
    crawled over the edge of the platform and sat down quietly upon the
    floor.

    "Wherever have you been, Eureka?" asked Dorothy, sternly.

    "Watching the wooden folks.  They're too funny for anything, Dorothy.
    Just now they are all going to bed, and - what do you think? - they
    unhook the hinges of their wings and put them in a corner until they
    wake up again."

    "What, the hinges?"

    "No; the wings."

    "That," said Zeb, "explains why this house is used by them for a
    prison.  If any of the Gargoyles act badly, and have to be put in jail,
    they are brought here and their wings unhooked and taken away from them
    until they promise to be good."

    The Wizard had listened intently to what Eureka had said.

    "I wish we had some of those loose wings," he said.

    "Could we fly with them?" asked Dorothy.

    "I think so.  If the Gargoyles can unhook the wings then the power to
    fly lies in the wings themselves, and not in the wooden bodies of the
    people who wear them.  So, if we had the wings, we could probably fly
    as well as they do - as least while we are in their country and under
    the spell of its magic."

    "But how would it help us to be able to fly?" questioned the girl.

    "Come here," said the little man, and took her to one of the corners of
    the building.  "Do you see that big rock standing on the hillside
    yonder?" he continued, pointing with his finger.

    "Yes; it's a good way off, but I can see it," she replied.

    "Well, inside that rock, which reaches up into the clouds, is an
    archway very much like the one we entered when we climbed the spiral
    stairway from the Valley of Voe.  I'll get my spy-glass, and then you
    can see it more plainly."

    He fetched a small but powerful telescope, which had been in his
    satchel, and by its aid the little girl clearly saw the opening.

    "Where does it lead to?" she asked.

    "That I cannot tell," said the Wizard; "but we cannot now be far below
    the earth's surface, and that entrance may lead to another stairway
    that will bring us on top of our world again, where we belong.  So, if
    we had the wings, and could escape the Gargoyles, we might fly to that
    rock and be saved."

    "I'll get you the wings," said Zeb, who had thoughtfully listened to
    all this.  "That is, if the kitten will show me where they are."

    "But how can you get down?" enquired the girl, wonderingly.

    For answer Zeb began to unfasten Jim's harness, strap by strap, and to
    buckle one piece to another until he had made a long leather strip that
    would reach to the ground.

    "I can climb down that, all right," he said.

    "No you can't," remarked Jim, with a twinkle in his round eyes.  "You
    may GO down, but you can only CLIMB up."

    "Well, I'll climb up when I get back, then," said the boy, with a
    laugh.  "Now, Eureka, you'll have to show me the way to those wings."

    "You must be very quiet," warned the kitten; "for if you make the least
    noise the Gargoyles will wake up.  They can hear a pin drop."

    "I'm not going to drop a pin," said Zeb.

    He had fastened one end of the strap to a wheel of the buggy, and now
    he let the line dangle over the side of the house.

    "Be careful," cautioned Dorothy, earnestly.

    "I will," said the boy, and let himself slide over the edge.

    The girl and the Wizard leaned over and watched Zeb work his way
    carefully downward, hand over hand, until he stood upon the ground
    below.  Eureka clung with her claws to the wooden side of the house and
    let herself down easily.  Then together they crept away to enter the
    low doorway of a neighboring dwelling.

    The watchers waited in breathless suspense until the boy again
    appeared, his arms now full of the wooden wings.

    When he came to where the strap was hanging he tied the wings all in a
    bunch to the end of the line, and the Wizard drew them up.  Then the
    line was let down again for Zeb to climb up by.  Eureka quickly
    followed him, and soon they were all standing together upon the
    platform, with eight of the much prized wooden wings beside them.

    The boy was no longer sleepy, but full of energy and excitement.  He
    put the harness together again and hitched Jim to the buggy.  Then,
    with the Wizard's help, he tried to fasten some of the wings to the old
    cab-horse.

    This was no easy task, because half of each one of the hinges of the
    wings was missing, it being still fastened to the body of the Gargoyle
    who had used it.  However, the Wizard went once more to his
    satchel - which seemed to contain a surprising variety of odds and
    ends - and brought out a spool of strong wire, by means of which they
    managed to fasten four of the wings to Jim's harness, two near his head
    and two near his tail.  They were a bit wiggley, but secure enough if
    only the harness held together.

    The other four wings were then fastened to the buggy, two on each side,
    for the buggy must bear the weight of the children and the Wizard as it
    flew through the air.

    These preparations had not consumed a great deal of time, but the
    sleeping Gargoyles were beginning to wake up and move around, and soon
    some of them would be hunting for their missing wings.  So the
    prisoners resolved to leave their prison at once.

    They mounted into the buggy, Dorothy holding Eureka safe in her lap.
    The girl sat in the middle of the seat, with Zeb and the Wizard on each
    side of her.  When all was ready the boy shook the reins and said:

    "Fly away, Jim!"

    "Which wings must I flop first?" asked the cab-horse, undecidedly.

    "Flop them all together," suggested the Wizard.

    "Some of them are crooked," objected the horse.

    "Never mind; we will steer with the wings on the buggy," said Zeb.
    "Just you light out and make for that rock, Jim; and don't waste any
    time about it, either."

    So the horse gave a groan, flopped its four wings all together, and
    flew away from the platform.  Dorothy was a little anxious about the
    success of their trip, for the way Jim arched his long neck and spread
    out his bony legs as he fluttered and floundered through the air was
    enough to make anybody nervous.  He groaned, too, as if frightened, and
    the wings creaked dreadfully because the Wizard had forgotten to oil
    them; but they kept fairly good time with the wings of the buggy, so
    that they made excellent progress from the start.  The only thing that
    anyone could complain of with justice was the fact that they wobbled
    first up and then down, as if the road were rocky instead of being as
    smooth as the air could make it.

    The main point, however, was that they flew, and flew swiftly, if a bit
    unevenly, toward the rock for which they had headed.

    Some of the Gargoyles saw them, presently, and lost no time in
    collecting a band to pursue the escaping prisoners; so that when
    Dorothy happened to look back she saw them coming in a great cloud that
    almost darkened the sky.




    13.  The Den of the Dragonettes


    Our friends had a good start and were able to maintain it, for with
    their eight wings they could go just as fast as could the Gargoyles.
    All the way to the great rock the wooden people followed them, and when
    Jim finally alighted at the mouth of the cavern the pursuers were still
    some distance away.

    "But, I'm afraid they'll catch us yet," said Dorothy, greatly excited.

    "No; we must stop them," declared the Wizard.  "Quick Zeb, help me pull
    off these wooden wings!"

    They tore off the wings, for which they had no further use, and the
    Wizard piled them in a heap just outside the entrance to the cavern.
    Then he poured over them all the kerosene oil that was left in his
    oil-can, and lighting a match set fire to the pile.

    The flames leaped up at once and the bonfire began to smoke and roar
    and crackle just as the great army of wooden Gargoyles arrived.  The
    creatures drew back at once, being filled with fear and horror; for
    such as dreadful thing as a fire they had never before known in all the
    history of their wooden land.

    Inside the archway were several doors, leading to different rooms built
    into the mountain, and Zeb and the Wizard lifted these wooden doors
    from their hinges and tossed them all on the flames.

    "That will prove a barrier for some time to come," said the little man,
    smiling pleasantly all over his wrinkled face at the success of their
    stratagem.  "Perhaps the flames will set fire to all that miserable
    wooden country, and if it does the loss will be very small and the
    Gargoyles never will be missed.  But come, my children; let us explore
    the mountain and discover which way we must go in order to escape from
    this cavern, which is getting to be almost as hot as a bake-oven."

    To their disappointment there was within this mountain no regular
    flight of steps by means of which they could mount to the earth's
    surface.  A sort of inclined tunnel led upward for a way, and they
    found the floor of it both rough and steep.  Then a sudden turn brought
    them to a narrow gallery where the buggy could not pass.  This delayed
    and bothered them for a while, because they did not wish to leave the
    buggy behind them.  It carried their baggage and was useful to ride in
    wherever there were good roads, and since it had accompanied them so
    far in their travels they felt it their duty to preserve it.  So Zeb
    and the Wizard set to work and took off the wheels and the top, and
    then they put the buggy edgewise, so it would take up the smallest
    space.  In this position they managed, with the aid of the patient
    cab-horse, to drag the vehicle through the narrow part of the passage.
    It was not a great distance, fortunately, and when the path grew
    broader they put the buggy together again and proceeded more
    comfortably.  But the road was nothing more than a series of rifts or
    cracks in the mountain, and it went zig-zag in every direction,
    slanting first up and then down until they were puzzled as to whether
    they were any nearer to the top of the earth than when they had
    started, hours before.

    "Anyhow," said Dorothy, "we've 'scaped those awful Gurgles, and that's
    ONE comfort!"

    "Probably the Gargoyles are still busy trying to put out the fire,"
    returned the Wizard.  "But even if they succeeded in doing that it
    would be very difficult for them to fly amongst these rocks; so I am
    sure we need fear them no longer."

    Once in a while they would come to a deep crack in the floor, which
    made the way quite dangerous; but there was still enough oil in the
    lanterns to give them light, and the cracks were not so wide but that
    they were able to jump over them.  Sometimes they had to climb over
    heaps of loose rock, where Jim could scarcely drag the buggy.  At such
    times Dorothy, Zeb and the Wizard all pushed behind, and lifted the
    wheels over the roughest places; so they managed, by dint of hard work,
    to keep going.  But the little party was both weary and discouraged
    when at last, on turning a sharp corner, the wanderers found themselves
    in a vast cave arching high over their heads and having a smooth, level
    floor.

    The cave was circular in shape, and all around its edge, near to the
    ground, appeared groups of dull yellow lights, two of them being always
    side by side.  These were motionless at first, but soon began to
    flicker more brightly and to sway slowly from side to side and then up
    and down.

    "What sort of place is this?" asked the boy, trying to see more clearly
    through the gloom.

    "I cannot imagine, I'm sure," answered the Wizard, also peering about.

    "Woogh!" snarled Eureka, arching her back until her hair stood straight
    on end; "it's den of alligators, or crocodiles, or some other dreadful
    creatures!  Don't you see their terrible eyes?"

    "Eureka sees better in the dark than we can," whispered Dorothy.  "Tell
    us, dear, what do the creatures look like?" she asked, addressing her
    pet.

    "I simply can't describe 'em," answered the kitten, shuddering.  "Their
    eyes are like pie-plates and their mouths like coal-scuttles.  But
    their bodies don't seem very big."

    "Where are they?" enquired the girl.

    "They are in little pockets all around the edge of this cavern.  Oh,
    Dorothy - you can't imagine what horrid things they are!  They're uglier
    than the Gargoyles."

    "Tut-tut! be careful how you criticise your neighbors," spoke a rasping
    voice near by.  "As a matter of fact you are rather ugly-looking
    creatures yourselves, and I'm sure mother has often told us we were the
    loveliest and prettiest things in all the world."

    Hearing these words our friends turned in the direction of the sound,
    and the Wizard held his lanterns so that their light would flood one of
    the little pockets in the rock.

    "Why, it's a dragon!" he exclaimed.

    "No," answered the owner of the big yellow eyes which were blinking at
    them so steadily; "you are wrong about that.  We hope to grow to be
    dragons some day, but just now we're only dragonettes."

    "What's that?" asked Dorothy, gazing fearfully at the great scaley
    head, the yawning mouth and the big eyes.

    "Young dragons, of course; but we are not allowed to call ourselves
    real dragons until we get our full growth," was the reply.  "The big
    dragons are very proud, and don't think children amount to much; but
    mother says that some day we will all be very powerful and important."

    "Where is your mother?" asked the Wizard, anxiously looking around.

    "She has gone up to the top of the earth to hunt for our dinner.  If
    she has good luck she will bring us an elephant, or a brace of
    rhinoceri, or perhaps a few dozen people to stay our hunger."

    "Oh; are you hungry?" enquired Dorothy, drawing back.

    "Very," said the dragonette, snapping its jaws.

    "And - and - do you eat people?"

    "To be sure, when we can get them.  But they've been very scarce for a
    few years and we usually have to be content with elephants or
    buffaloes," answered the creature, in a regretful tone.

    "How old are you?" enquired Zeb, who stared at the yellow eyes as if
    fascinated.

    "Quite young, I grieve to say; and all of my brothers and sisters that
    you see here are practically my own age.  If I remember rightly, we
    were sixty-six years old the day before yesterday."

    "But that isn't young!" cried Dorothy, in amazement.

    "No?" drawled the dragonette; "it seems to me very babyish."

    "How old is your mother?" asked the girl.

    "Mother's about two thousand years old; but she carelessly lost track
    of her age a few centuries ago and skipped several hundreds.  She's a
    little fussy, you know, and afraid of growing old, being a widow and
    still in her prime."

    "I should think she would be," agreed Dorothy.  Then, after a moment's
    thought, she asked:  "Are we friends or enemies?  I mean, will you be
    good to us, or do you intend to eat us?"

    "As for that, we dragonettes would love to eat you, my child; but
    unfortunately mother has tied all our tails around the rocks at the
    back of our individual caves, so that we can not crawl out to get you.
    If you choose to come nearer we will make a mouthful of you in a wink;
    but unless you do you will remain quite safe."

    There was a regretful accent in the creature's voice, and at the words
    all the other dragonettes sighed dismally.

    Dorothy felt relieved.  Presently she asked:

    "Why did your mother tie your tails?"

    "Oh, she is sometimes gone for several weeks on her hunting trips, and
    if we were not tied we would crawl all over the mountain and fight with
    each other and get into a lot of mischief.  Mother usually knows what
    she is about, but she made a mistake this time; for you are sure to
    escape us unless you come too near, and you probably won't do that."

    "No, indeed!" said the little girl.  "We don't wish to be eaten by such
    awful beasts."

    "Permit me to say," returned the dragonette, "that you are rather
    impolite to call us names, knowing that we cannot resent your insults.
    We consider ourselves very beautiful in appearance, for mother has told
    us so, and she knows.  And we are of an excellent family and have a
    pedigree that I challenge any humans to equal, as it extends back about
    twenty thousand years, to the time of the famous Green Dragon of
    Atlantis, who lived in a time when humans had not yet been created.
    Can you match that pedigree, little girl?"

    "Well," said Dorothy, "I was born on a farm in Kansas, and I guess
    that's being just as 'spectable and haughty as living in a cave with
    your tail tied to a rock.  If it isn't I'll have to stand it, that's
    all."

    "Tastes differ," murmured the dragonette, slowly drooping its scaley
    eyelids over its yellow eyes, until they looked like half-moons.

    Being reassured by the fact that the creatures could not crawl out of
    their rock-pockets, the children and the Wizard now took time to
    examine them more closely.  The heads of the dragonettes were as big as
    barrels and covered with hard, greenish scales that glittered brightly
    under the light of the lanterns.  Their front legs, which grew just
    back of their heads, were also strong and big; but their bodies were
    smaller around than their heads, and dwindled away in a long line until
    their tails were slim as a shoe-string.  Dorothy thought, if it had
    taken them sixty-six years to grow to this size, that it would be fully
    a hundred years more before they could hope to call themselves dragons,
    and that seemed like a good while to wait to grow up.

    "It occurs to me," said the Wizard, "that we ought to get out of this
    place before the mother dragon comes back."

    "Don't hurry," called one of the dragonettes; "mother will be glad to
    meet you, I'm sure."

    "You may be right," replied the Wizard, "but we're a little particular
    about associating with strangers.  Will you kindly tell us which way
    your mother went to get on top the earth?"

    "That is not a fair question to ask us," declared another dragonette.
    "For, if we told you truly, you might escape us altogether; and if we
    told you an untruth we would be naughty and deserve to be punished."

    "Then," decided Dorothy, "we must find our way out the best we can."

    They circled all around the cavern, keeping a good distance away from
    the blinking yellow eyes of the dragonettes, and presently discovered
    that there were two paths leading from the wall opposite to the place
    where they had entered.  They selected one of these at a venture and
    hurried along it as fast as they could go, for they had no idea when
    the mother dragon would be back and were very anxious not to make her
    acquaintance.




    14.  Ozma Uses the Magic Belt


    For a considerable distance the way led straight upward in a gentle
    incline, and the wanderers made such good progress that they grew
    hopeful and eager, thinking they might see sunshine at any minute.  But
    at length they came unexpectedly upon a huge rock that shut off the
    passage and blocked them from proceeding a single step farther.

    This rock was separate from the rest of the mountain and was in motion,
    turning slowly around and around as if upon a pivot.  When first they
    came to it there was a solid wall before them; but presently it
    revolved until there was exposed a wide, smooth path across it to the
    other side.  This appeared so unexpectedly that they were unprepared to
    take advantage of it at first, and allowed the rocky wall to swing
    around again before they had decided to pass over.  But they knew now
    that there was a means of escape and so waited patiently until the path
    appeared for the second time.

    The children and the Wizard rushed across the moving rock and sprang
    into the passage beyond, landing safely though a little out of breath.
    Jim the cab-horse came last, and the rocky wall almost caught him; for
    just as he leaped to the floor of the further passage the wall swung
    across it and a loose stone that the buggy wheels knocked against fell
    into the narrow crack where the rock turned, and became wedged there.

    They heard a crunching, grinding sound, a loud snap, and the turn-table
    came to a stop with its broadest surface shutting off the path from
    which they had come.

    "Never mind," said Zeb, "we don't want to get back, anyhow."

    "I'm not so sure of that," returned Dorothy.  "The mother dragon may
    come down and catch us here."

    "It is possible," agreed the Wizard, "if this proves to be the path she
    usually takes.  But I have been examining this tunnel, and I do not see
    any signs of so large a beast having passed through it."

    "Then we're all right," said the girl, "for if the dragon went the
    other way she can't poss'bly get to us now."

    "Of course not, my dear.  But there is another thing to consider.  The
    mother dragon probably knows the road to the earth's surface, and if
    she went the other way then we have come the wrong way," said the
    Wizard, thoughtfully.

    "Dear me!" cried Dorothy.  "That would be unlucky, wouldn't it?"

    "Very.  Unless this passage also leads to the top of the earth," said
    Zeb.  "For my part, if we manage to get out of here I'll be glad it
    isn't the way the dragon goes."

    "So will I," returned Dorothy.  "It's enough to have your pedigree
    flung in your face by those saucy dragonettes.  No one knows what the
    mother might do."

    They now moved on again, creeping slowly up another steep incline.  The
    lanterns were beginning to grow dim, and the Wizard poured the
    remaining oil from one into the other, so that the one light would last
    longer.  But their journey was almost over, for in a short time they
    reached a small cave from which there was no further outlet.

    They did not realize their ill fortune at first, for their hearts were
    gladdened by the sight of a ray of sunshine coming through a small
    crack in the roof of the cave, far overhead.  That meant that their
    world - the real world - was not very far away, and that the succession
    of perilous adventures they had encountered had at last brought them
    near the earth's surface, which meant home to them.  But when the
    adventurers looked more carefully around them they discovered that
    there were in a strong prison from which there was no hope of escape.

    "But we're ALMOST on earth again," cried Dorothy, "for there is the
    sun - the most BEAU'FUL sun that shines!" and she pointed eagerly at the
    crack in the distant roof.

    "Almost on earth isn't being there," said the kitten, in a discontented
    tone.  "It wouldn't be possible for even me to get up to that crack - or
    through it if I got there."

    "It appears that the path ends here," announced the Wizard, gloomily.

    "And there is no way to go back," added Zeb, with a low whistle of
    perplexity.

    "I was sure it would come to this, in the end," remarked the old
    cab-horse.  "Folks don't fall into the middle of the earth and then get
    back again to tell of their adventures - not in real life.  And the
    whole thing has been unnatural because that cat and I are both able to
    talk your language, and to understand the words you say."

    "And so can the nine tiny piglets," added Eureka. "Don't forget them,
    for I may have to eat them, after all."

    "I've heard animals talk before," said Dorothy, "and no harm came of
    it."

    "Were you ever before shut up in a cave, far under the earth, with no
    way of getting out?" enquired the horse, seriously.

    "No," answered Dorothy.  "But don't you lose heart, Jim, for I'm sure
    this isn't the end of our story, by any means."

    The reference to the piglets reminded the Wizard that his pets had not
    enjoyed much exercise lately, and must be tired of their prison in his
    pocket.  So he sat down upon the floor of the cave, brought the piglets
    out one by one, and allowed them to run around as much as they pleased.

    "My dears," he said to them, "I'm afraid I've got you into a lot of
    trouble, and that you will never again be able to leave this gloomy
    cave."

    "What's wrong?" asked a piglet.  "We've been in the dark quite a while,
    and you may as well explain what has happened."

    The Wizard told them of the misfortune that had overtaken the wanderers.

    "Well," said another piglet, "you are a wizard, are you not?"

    "I am," replied the little man.

    "Then you can do a few wizzes and get us out of this hole," declared
    the tiny one, with much confidence.

    "I could if I happened to be a real wizard," returned the master sadly.
    "But I'm not, my piggy-wees; I'm a humbug wizard."

    "Nonsense!" cried several of the piglets, together.

    "You can ask Dorothy," said the little man, in an injured tone.

    "It's true enough," returned the girl, earnestly.  "Our friend Oz is
    merely a humbug wizard, for he once proved it to me.  He can do several
    very wonderful things - if he knows how.  But he can't wiz a single
    thing if he hasn't the tools and machinery to work with."

    "Thank you, my dear, for doing me justice," responded the Wizard,
    gratefully.  "To be accused of being a real wizard, when I'm not, is a
    slander I will not tamely submit to.  But I am one of the greatest
    humbug wizards that ever lived, and you will realize this when we have
    all starved together and our bones are scattered over the floor of this
    lonely cave."

    "I don't believe we'll realize anything, when it comes to that,"
    remarked Dorothy, who had been deep in thought.  "But I'm not going to
    scatter my bones just yet, because I need them, and you prob'ly need
    yours, too."

    "We are helpless to escape," sighed the Wizard.

    "WE may be helpless," answered Dorothy, smiling at him, "but there are
    others who can do more than we can.  Cheer up, friends.  I'm sure Ozma
    will help us."

    "Ozma!" exclaimed the Wizard.  "Who is Ozma?"

    "The girl that rules the marvelous Land of Oz," was the reply.  "She's
    a friend of mine, for I met her in the Land of Ev, not long ago, and
    went to Oz with her."

    "For the second time?" asked the Wizard, with great interest.

    "Yes.  The first time I went to Oz I found you there, ruling the
    Emerald City.  After you went up in a balloon, and escaped us, I got
    back to Kansas by means of a pair of magical silver shoes."

    "I remember those shoes," said the little man, nodding.  "They once
    belonged to the Wicked Witch.  Have you them here with you?"

    "No; I lost them somewhere in the air," explained the child.  "But the
    second time I went to the Land of Oz I owned the Nome King's Magic
    Belt, which is much more powerful than were the Silver Shoes."

    "Where is that Magic Belt?" enquired the Wizard, who had listened with
    great interest.

    "Ozma has it; for its powers won't work in a common, ordinary country
    like the United States.  Anyone in a fairy country like the Land of Oz
    can do anything with it; so I left it with my friend the Princess Ozma,
    who used it to wish me in Australia with Uncle Henry."

    "And were you?" asked Zeb, astonished at what he heard.

    "Of course; in just a jiffy.  And Ozma has an enchanted picture hanging
    in her room that shows her the exact scene where any of her friends may
    be, at any time she chooses.  All she has to do is to say: 'I wonder
    what So-and-so is doing,' and at once the picture shows where her
    friend is and what the friend is doing.  That's REAL magic, Mr. Wizard;
    isn't it?  Well, every day at four o'clock Ozma has promised to look at
    me in that picture, and if I am in need of help I am to make her a
    certain sign and she will put on the Nome King's Magic Belt and wish me
    to be with her in Oz."

    "Do you mean that Princess Ozma will see this cave in her enchanted
    picture, and see all of us here, and what we are doing?" demanded Zeb.

    "Of course; when it is four o'clock," she replied, with a laugh at his
    startled expression.

    "And when you make a sign she will bring you to her in the Land of Oz?"
    continued the boy.

    "That's it, exactly; by means of the Magic Belt."

    "Then," said the Wizard, "you will be saved, little Dorothy; and I am
    very glad of it.  The rest of us will die much more cheerfully when we
    know you have escaped our sad fate."

    "I won't die cheerfully!" protested the kitten.  "There's nothing
    cheerful about dying that I could ever see, although they say a cat has
    nine lives, and so must die nine times."

    "Have you ever died yet?" enquired the boy.

    "No, and I'm not anxious to begin," said Eureka.

    "Don't worry, dear," Dorothy exclaimed, "I'll hold you in my arms, and
    take you with me."

    "Take us, too!" cried the nine tiny piglets, all in one breath.

    "Perhaps I can," answered Dorothy.  "I'll try."

    "Couldn't you manage to hold me in your arms?" asked the cab-horse.

    Dorothy laughed.

    "I'll do better than that," she promised, "for I can easily save you
    all, once I am myself in the Land of Oz."

    "How?" they asked.

    "By using the Magic Belt.  All I need do is to wish you with me, and
    there you'll be - safe in the royal palace!"

    "Good!" cried Zeb.

    "I built that palace, and the Emerald City, too," remarked the Wizard,
    in a thoughtful tone, "and I'd like to see them again, for I was very
    happy among the Munchkins and Winkies and Quadlings and Gillikins."

    "Who are they?" asked the boy.

    "The four nations that inhabit the Land of Oz," was the reply.  "I
    wonder if they would treat me nicely if I went there again."

    "Of course they would!" declared Dorothy.  "They are still proud of
    their former Wizard, and often speak of you kindly."

    "Do you happen to know whatever became of the Tin Woodman and the
    Scarecrow?" he enquired.

    "They live in Oz yet," said the girl, "and are very important people."

    "And the Cowardly Lion?"

    "Oh, he lives there too, with his friend the Hungry Tiger; and Billina
    is there, because she liked the place better than Kansas, and wouldn't
    go with me to Australia."

    "I'm afraid I don't know the Hungry Tiger and Billina," said the
    Wizard, shaking his head.  "Is Billina a girl?"

    "No; she's a yellow hen, and a great friend of mine.  You're sure to
    like Billina, when you know her," asserted Dorothy.

    "Your friends sound like a menagerie," remarked Zeb, uneasily.
    "Couldn't you wish me in some safer place than Oz."

    "Don't worry," replied the girl.  "You'll just love the folks in Oz,
    when you get acquainted.  What time is it, Mr. Wizard?"

    The little man looked at his watch - a big silver one that he carried in
    his vest pocket.

    "Half-past three," he said.

    "Then we must wait for half an hour," she continued; "but it won't take
    long, after that, to carry us all to the Emerald City."

    They sat silently thinking for a time.  Then Jim suddenly asked:

    "Are there any horses in Oz?"

    "Only one," replied Dorothy, "and he's a sawhorse."

    "A what?"

    "A sawhorse.  Princess Ozma once brought him to life with a
    witch-powder, when she was a boy."

    "Was Ozma once a boy?" asked Zeb, wonderingly.

    "Yes; a wicked witch enchanted her, so she could not rule her kingdom.
    But she's a girl now, and the sweetest, loveliest girl in all the
    world."

    "A sawhorse is a thing they saw boards on," remarked Jim, with a sniff.

    "It is when it's not alive," acknowledged the girl.  "But this sawhorse
    can trot as fast as you can, Jim; and he's very wise, too."

    "Pah!  I'll race the miserable wooden donkey any day in the week!"
    cried the cab-horse.

    Dorothy did not reply to that.  She felt that Jim would know more about
    the Saw-Horse later on.

    The time dragged wearily enough to the eager watchers, but finally the
    Wizard announced that four o'clock had arrived, and Dorothy caught up
    the kitten and began to make the signal that had been agreed upon to
    the far-away invisible Ozma.

    "Nothing seems to happen," said Zeb, doubtfully.

    "Oh, we must give Ozma time to put on the Magic Belt," replied the girl.

    She had scarcely spoken the words then she suddenly disappeared from
    the cave, and with her went the kitten.  There had been no sound of any
    kind and no warning.  One moment Dorothy sat beside them with the
    kitten in her lap, and a moment later the horse, the piglets, the
    Wizard and the boy were all that remained in the underground prison.

    "I believe we will soon follow her," announced the Wizard, in a tone of
    great relief; "for I know something about the magic of the fairyland
    that is called the Land of Oz.  Let us be ready, for we may be sent for
    any minute."

    He put the piglets safely away in his pocket again and then he and Zeb
    got into the buggy and sat expectantly upon the seat.

    "Will it hurt?" asked the boy, in a voice that trembled a little.

    "Not at all," replied the Wizard.  "It will all happen as quick as a
    wink."

    And that was the way it did happen.

    The cab-horse gave a nervous start and Zeb began to rub his eyes to
    make sure he was not asleep.  For they were in the streets of a
    beautiful emerald-green city, bathed in a grateful green light that was
    especially pleasing to their eyes, and surrounded by merry faced people
    in gorgeous green-and-gold costumes of many extraordinary designs.

    Before them were the jewel-studded gates of a magnificent palace, and
    now the gates opened slowly as if inviting them to enter the courtyard,
    where splendid flowers were blooming and pretty fountains shot their
    silvery sprays into the air.

    Zeb shook the reins to rouse the cab-horse from his stupor of
    amazement, for the people were beginning to gather around and stare at
    the strangers.

    "Gid-dap!" cried the boy, and at the word Jim slowly trotted into the
    courtyard and drew the buggy along the jewelled driveway to the great
    entrance of the royal palace.




    15.  Old Friends are Reunited


    Many servants dressed in handsome uniforms stood ready to welcome the
    new arrivals, and when the Wizard got out of the buggy a pretty girl in
    a green gown cried out in surprise:

    "Why, it's Oz, the Wonderful Wizard, come back again!"

    The little man looked at her closely and then took both the maiden's
    hands in his and shook them cordially.

    "On my word," he exclaimed, "it's little Jellia Jamb - as pert and
    pretty as ever!"

    "Why not, Mr. Wizard?" asked Jellia, bowing low.  "But I'm afraid you
    cannot rule the Emerald City, as you used to, because we now have a
    beautiful Princess whom everyone loves dearly."

    "And the people will not willingly part with her," added a tall soldier
    in a Captain-General's uniform.

    The Wizard turned to look at him.

    "Did you not wear green whiskers at one time?" he asked.

    "Yes," said the soldier; "but I shaved them off long ago, and since
    then I have risen from a private to be the Chief General of the Royal
    Armies."

    "That's nice," said the little man.  "But I assure you, my good people,
    that I do not wish to rule the Emerald City," he added, earnestly.

    "In that case you are very welcome!" cried all the servants, and it
    pleased the Wizard to note the respect with which the royal retainers
    bowed before him.  His fame had not been forgotten in the Land of Oz,
    by any means.

    "Where is Dorothy?" enquired Zeb, anxiously, as he left the buggy and
    stood beside his friend the little Wizard.

    "She is with the Princess Ozma, in the private rooms of the palace,"
    replied Jellia Jamb.  "But she has ordered me to make you welcome and
    to show you to your apartments."

    The boy looked around him with wondering eyes.  Such magnificence and
    wealth as was displayed in this palace was more than he had ever
    dreamed of, and he could scarcely believe that all the gorgeous glitter
    was real and not tinsel.

    "What's to become of me?" asked the horse, uneasily.  He had seen
    considerable of life in the cities in his younger days, and knew that
    this regal palace was no place for him.

    It perplexed even Jellia Jamb, for a time, to know what to do with the
    animal.  The green maiden was much astonished at the sight of so
    unusual a creature, for horses were unknown in this Land; but those who
    lived in the Emerald City were apt to be astonished by queer sights, so
    after inspecting the cab-horse and noting the mild look in his big eyes
    the girl decided not to be afraid of him.

    "There are no stables here," said the Wizard, "unless some have been
    built since I went away."

    "We have never needed them before," answered Jellia; "for the Sawhorse
    lives in a room of the palace, being much smaller and more natural in
    appearance than this great beast you have brought with you."

    "Do you mean that I'm a freak?" asked Jim, angrily.

    "Oh, no," she hastened to say, "there may be many more like you in the
    place you came from, but in Oz any horse but a Sawhorse is unusual."

    This mollified Jim a little, and after some thought the green maiden
    decided to give the cab-horse a room in the palace, such a big building
    having many rooms that were seldom in use.

    So Zeb unharnessed Jim, and several of the servants then led the horse
    around to the rear, where they selected a nice large apartment that he
    could have all to himself.

    Then Jellia said to the Wizard:

    "Your own room - which was back of the great Throne Room - has been
    vacant ever since you left us.  Would you like it again?"

    "Yes, indeed!" returned the little man.  "It will seem like being at
    home again, for I lived in that room for many, many years."

    He knew the way to it, and a servant followed him, carrying his
    satchel.  Zeb was also escorted to a room - so grand and beautiful that
    he almost feared to sit in the chairs or lie upon the bed, lest he
    might dim their splendor.  In the closets he discovered many fancy
    costumes of rich velvets and brocades, and one of the attendants told
    him to dress himself in any of the clothes that pleased him and to be
    prepared to dine with the Princess and Dorothy in an hour's time.

    Opening from the chamber was a fine bathroom having a marble tub with
    perfumed water; so the boy, still dazed by the novelty of his
    surroundings, indulged in a good bath and then selected a maroon velvet
    costume with silver buttons to replace his own soiled and much worn
    clothing.  There were silk stockings and soft leather slippers with
    diamond buckles to accompany his new costume, and when he was fully
    dressed Zeb looked much more dignified and imposing than ever before in
    his life.

    He was all ready when an attendant came to escort him to the presence
    of the Princess; he followed bashfully and was ushered into a room more
    dainty and attractive than it was splendid.  Here he found Dorothy
    seated beside a young girl so marvelously beautiful that the boy
    stopped suddenly with a gasp of admiration.

    But Dorothy sprang up and ran to seize her friend's hand drawing him
    impulsively toward the lovely Princess, who smiled most graciously upon
    her guest.  Then the Wizard entered, and his presence relieved the
    boy's embarrassment.  The little man was clothed in black velvet, with
    many sparkling emerald ornaments decorating his breast; but his bald
    head and wrinkled features made him appear more amusing than impressive.

    Ozma had been quite curious to meet the famous man who had built the
    Emerald City and united the Munchkins, Gillikins, Quadlings and Winkies
    into one people; so when they were all four seated at the dinner table
    the Princess said:

    "Please tell me, Mr. Wizard, whether you called yourself Oz after this
    great country, or whether you believe my country is called Oz after
    you.  It is a matter that I have long wished to enquire about, because
    you are of a strange race and my own name is Ozma.  No, one, I am sure,
    is better able to explain this mystery than you."

    "That is true," answered the little Wizard; "therefore it will give me
    pleasure to explain my connection with your country.  In the first
    place, I must tell you that I was born in Omaha, and my father, who was
    a politician, named me Oscar Zoroaster Phadrig Isaac Norman Henkle
    Emmannuel Ambroise Diggs, Diggs being the last name because he could
    think of no more to go before it.  Taken altogether, it was a
    dreadfully long name to weigh down a poor innocent child, and one of
    the hardest lessons I ever learned was to remember my own name.  When I
    grew up I just called myself O. Z., because the other initials were
    P-I-N-H-E-A-D; and that spelled 'pinhead,' which was a reflection on my
    intelligence."

    "Surely no one could blame you for cutting your name short," said Ozma,
    sympathetically.  "But didn't you cut it almost too short?"

    "Perhaps so," replied the Wizard.  "When a young man I ran away from
    home and joined a circus.  I used to call myself a Wizard, and do
    tricks of ventriloquism."

    "What does that mean?" asked the Princess.

    "Throwing my voice into any object I pleased, to make it appear that
    the object was speaking instead of me.  Also I began to make balloon
    ascensions.  On my balloon and on all the other articles I used in the
    circus I painted the two initials: 'O. Z.', to show that those things
    belonged to me.

    "One day my balloon ran away with me and brought me across the deserts
    to this beautiful country.  When the people saw me come from the sky
    they naturally thought me some superior creature, and bowed down before
    me.  I told them I was a Wizard, and showed them some easy tricks that
    amazed them; and when they saw the initials painted on the balloon they
    called me Oz."

    "Now I begin to understand," said the Princess, smiling.

    "At that time," continued the Wizard, busily eating his soup while
    talking, "there were four separate countries in this Land, each one of
    the four being ruled by a Witch.  But the people thought my power was
    greater than that of the Witches; and perhaps the Witches thought so
    too, for they never dared oppose me.  I ordered the Emerald City to be
    built just where the four countries cornered together, and when it was
    completed I announced myself the Ruler of the Land of Oz, which
    included all the four countries of the Munchkins, the Gillikins, the
    Winkies and the Quadlings.  Over this Land I ruled in peace for many
    years, until I grew old and longed to see my native city once again.
    So when Dorothy was first blown to this place by a cyclone I arranged
    to go away with her in a balloon; but the balloon escaped too soon and
    carried me back alone.  After many adventures I reached Omaha, only to
    find that all my old friends were dead or had moved away.  So, having
    nothing else to do, I joined a circus again, and made my balloon
    ascensions until the earthquake caught me."

    "That is quite a history," said Ozma; "but there is a little more
    history about the Land of Oz that you do not seem to
    understand - perhaps for the reason that no one ever told it you.  Many
    years before you came here this Land was united under one Ruler, as it
    is now, and the Ruler's name was always 'Oz,' which means in our
    language 'Great and Good'; or, if the Ruler happened to be a woman, her
    name was always 'Ozma.'  But once upon a time four Witches leagued
    together to depose the king and rule the four parts of the kingdom
    themselves; so when the Ruler, my grandfather, was hunting one day, one
    Wicked Witch named Mombi stole him and carried him away, keeping him a
    close prisoner.  Then the Witches divided up the kingdom, and ruled the
    four parts of it until you came here.  That was why the people were so
    glad to see you, and why they thought from your initials that you were
    their rightful ruler."

    "But, at that time," said the Wizard, thoughtfully, "there were two
    Good Witches and two Wicked Witches ruling in the land."

    "Yes," replied Ozma, "because a good Witch had conquered Mombi in the
    North and Glinda the Good had conquered the evil Witch in the South.
    But Mombi was still my grandfather's jailor, and afterward my father's
    jailor.  When I was born she transformed me into a boy, hoping that no
    one would ever recognize me and know that I was the rightful Princess
    of the Land of Oz.  But I escaped from her and am now the Ruler of my
    people."

    "I am very glad of that," said the Wizard, "and hope you will consider
    me one of your most faithful and devoted subjects."

    "We owe a great deal to the Wonderful Wizard," continued the Princess,
    "for it was you who built this splendid Emerald City."

    "Your people built it," he answered.  "I only bossed the job, as we say
    in Omaha."

    "But you ruled it wisely and well for many years," said she, "and made
    the people proud of your magical art.  So, as you are now too old to
    wander abroad and work in a circus, I offer you a home here as long as
    you live.  You shall be the Official Wizard of my kingdom, and be
    treated with every respect and consideration."

    "I accept your kind offer with gratitude, gracious Princess," the
    little man said, in a soft voice, and they could all see that
    tear-drops were standing in his keen old eyes.  It meant a good deal to
    him to secure a home like this.

    "He's only a humbug Wizard, though," said Dorothy, smiling at him.

    "And that is the safest kind of a Wizard to have," replied Ozma,
    promptly.

    "Oz can do some good tricks, humbug or no humbug," announced Zeb, who
    was now feeling more at ease.

    "He shall amuse us with his tricks tomorrow," said the Princess.  "I
    have sent messengers to summon all of Dorothy's old friends to meet her
    and give her welcome, and they ought to arrive very soon, now."

    Indeed, the dinner was no sooner finished than in rushed the Scarecrow,
    to hug Dorothy in his padded arms and tell her how glad he was to see
    her again.  The Wizard was also most heartily welcomed by the straw
    man, who was an important personage in the Land of Oz.

    "How are your brains?" enquired the little humbug, as he grasped the
    soft, stuffed hands of his old friend.

    "Working finely," answered the Scarecrow.  "I'm very certain, Oz, that
    you gave me the best brains in the world, for I can think with them day
    and night, when all other brains are fast asleep."

    "How long did you rule the Emerald City, after I left here?" was the
    next question.

    "Quite awhile, until I was conquered by a girl named General Jinjur.
    But Ozma soon conquered her, with the help of Glinda the Good, and
    after that I went to live with Nick Chopper, the Tin Woodman."

    Just then a loud cackling was heard outside; and, when a servant threw
    open the door with a low bow, a yellow hen strutted in.  Dorothy sprang
    forward and caught the fluffy fowl in her arms, uttering at the same
    time a glad cry.

    "Oh, Billina!" she said; "how fat and sleek you've grown."

    "Why shouldn't I?" asked the hen, in a sharp, clear voice.  "I live on
    the fat of the land - don't I, Ozma?"

    "You have everything you wish for," said the Princess.

    Around Billina's neck was a string of beautiful pearls, and on her legs
    were bracelets of emeralds.  She nestled herself comfortably in
    Dorothy's lap until the kitten gave a snarl of jealous anger and leaped
    up with a sharp claw fiercely bared to strike Billina a blow.  But the
    little girl gave the angry kitten such a severe cuff that it jumped
    down again without daring to scratch.

    "How horrid of you, Eureka!" cried Dorothy.  "Is that the way to treat
    my friends?"

    "You have queer friends, seems to me," replied the kitten, in a surly
    tone.

    "Seems to me the same way," said Billina, scornfully, "if that beastly
    cat is one of them."

    "Look here!" said Dorothy, sternly.  "I won't have any quarrelling in
    the Land of Oz, I can tell you!  Everybody lives in peace here, and
    loves everybody else; and unless you two, Billina and Eureka, make up
    and be friends, I'll take my Magic Belt and wish you both home again,
    IMMEJITLY.  So, there!"

    They were both much frightened at the threat, and promised meekly to be
    good.  But it was never noticed that they became very warm friends, for
    all of that.

    And now the Tin Woodman arrived, his body most beautifully
    nickle-plated, so that it shone splendidly in the brilliant light of
    the room.  The Tin Woodman loved Dorothy most tenderly, and welcomed
    with joy the return of the little old Wizard.

    "Sir," said he to the latter, "I never can thank you enough for the
    excellent heart you once gave me.  It has made me many friends, I
    assure you, and it beats as kindly and lovingly today as it every did."

    "I'm glad to hear that," said the Wizard.  "I was afraid it would get
    moldy in that tin body of yours."

    "Not at all," returned Nick Chopper.  "It keeps finely, being preserved
    in my air-tight chest."

    Zeb was a little shy when first introduced to these queer people; but
    they were so friendly and sincere that he soon grew to admire them very
    much, even finding some good qualities in the yellow hen.  But he
    became nervous again when the next visitor was announced.

    "This," said Princess Ozma, "is my friend Mr. H. M. Woggle-Bug, T. E.,
    who assisted me one time when I was in great distress, and is now the
    Dean of the Royal College of Athletic Science."

    "Ah," said the Wizard; "I'm pleased to meet so distinguished a
    personage."

    "H. M.," said the Woggle-Bug, pompously, "means Highly Magnified; and
    T. E. means Thoroughly Educated.  I am, in reality, a very big bug, and
    doubtless the most intelligent being in all this broad domain."

    "How well you disguise it," said the Wizard.  "But I don't doubt your
    word in the least."

    "Nobody doubts it, sir," replied the Woggle-Bug, and drawing a book
    from its pocket the strange insect turned its back on the company and
    sat down in a corner to read.

    Nobody minded this rudeness, which might have seemed more impolite in
    one less thoroughly educated; so they straightway forgot him and joined
    in a merry conversation that kept them well amused until bed-time
    arrived.




    16.  Jim, The Cab-Horse


    Jim the Cab-horse found himself in possession of a large room with a
    green marble floor and carved marble wainscoting, which was so stately
    in its appearance that it would have awed anyone else.  Jim accepted it
    as a mere detail, and at his command the attendants gave his coat a
    good rubbing, combed his mane and tail, and washed his hoofs and
    fetlocks.  Then they told him dinner would be served directly and he
    replied that they could not serve it too quickly to suit his
    convenience.  First they brought him a steaming bowl of soup, which the
    horse eyed in dismay.

    "Take that stuff away!" he commanded.  "Do you take me for a
    salamander?"

    They obeyed at once, and next served a fine large turbot on a silver
    platter, with drawn gravy poured over it.

    "Fish!" cried Jim, with a sniff.  "Do you take me for a tom-cat?  Away
    with it!"

    The servants were a little discouraged, but soon they brought in a
    great tray containing two dozen nicely roasted quail on toast.

    "Well, well!" said the horse, now thoroughly provoked.  "Do you take me
    for a weasel?  How stupid and ignorant you are, in the Land of Oz, and
    what dreadful things you feed upon!  Is there nothing that is decent to
    eat in this palace?"

    The trembling servants sent for the Royal Steward, who came in haste
    and said:

    "What would your Highness like for dinner?"

    "Highness!" repeated Jim, who was unused to such titles.

    "You are at least six feet high, and that is higher than any other
    animal in this country," said the Steward.

    "Well, my Highness would like some oats,"  declared the horse.

    "Oats?  We have no whole oats," the Steward replied, with much
    deference.  "But there is any quantity of oatmeal, which we often cook
    for breakfast.  Oatmeal is a breakfast dish," added the Steward, humbly.

    "I'll make it a dinner dish," said Jim.  "Fetch it on, but don't cook
    it, as you value your life."

    You see, the respect shown the worn-out old cab-horse made him a little
    arrogant, and he forgot he was a guest, never having been treated
    otherwise than as a servant since the day he was born, until his
    arrival in the Land of Oz.  But the royal attendants did not heed the
    animal's ill temper.  They soon mixed a tub of oatmeal with a little
    water, and Jim ate it with much relish.

    Then the servants heaped a lot of rugs upon the floor and the old horse
    slept on the softest bed he had ever known in his life.

    In the morning, as soon as it was daylight, he resolved to take a walk
    and try to find some grass for breakfast; so he ambled calmly through
    the handsome arch of the doorway, turned the corner of the palace,
    wherein all seemed asleep, and came face to face with the Sawhorse.

    Jim stopped abruptly, being startled and amazed.  The Sawhorse stopped
    at the same time and stared at the other with its queer protruding
    eyes, which were mere knots in the log that formed its body.  The legs
    of the Sawhorse were four sticks driving into holes bored in the log;
    its tail was a small branch that had been left by accident and its
    mouth a place chopped in one end of the body which projected a little
    and served as a head.  The ends of the wooden legs were shod with
    plates of solid gold, and the saddle of the Princess Ozma, which was of
    red leather set with sparkling diamonds, was strapped to the clumsy
    body.

    Jim's eyes stuck out as much as those of the Sawhorse, and he stared at
    the creature with his ears erect and his long head drawn back until it
    rested against his arched neck.

    In this comical position the two horses circled slowly around each
    other for a while, each being unable to realize what the singular thing
    might be which it now beheld for the first time.  Then Jim exclaimed:

    "For goodness sake, what sort of a being are you?"

    "I'm a Sawhorse," replied the other.

    "Oh; I believe I've heard of you," said the cab-horse; "but you are
    unlike anything that I expected to see."

    "I do not doubt it," the Sawhorse observed, with a tone of pride.  "I
    am considered quite unusual."

    "You are, indeed.  But a rickety wooden thing like you has no right to
    be alive."

    "I couldn't help it," returned the other, rather crestfallen.  "Ozma
    sprinkled me with a magic powder, and I just had to live.  I know I'm
    not much account; but I'm the only horse in all the Land of Oz, so they
    treat me with great respect."

    "You, a horse!"

    "Oh, not a real one, of course.  There are no real horses here at all.
    But I'm a splendid imitation of one."

    Jim gave an indignant neigh.

    "Look at me!" he cried.  "Behold a real horse!"

    The wooden animal gave a start, and then examined the other intently.

    "Is it possible that you are a Real Horse?" he murmured.

    "Not only possible, but true," replied Jim, who was gratified by the
    impression he had created.  "It is proved by my fine points.  For
    example, look at the long hairs on my tail, with which I can whisk away
    the flies."

    "The flies never trouble me," said the Saw-Horse.

    "And notice my great strong teeth, with which I nibble the grass."

    "It is not necessary for me to eat," observed the Sawhorse.

    "Also examine my broad chest, which enables me to draw deep, full
    breaths," said Jim, proudly.

    "I have no need to breathe," returned the other.

    "No; you miss many pleasures," remarked the cab-horse, pityingly.  "You
    do not know the relief of brushing away a fly that has bitten you, nor
    the delight of eating delicious food, nor the satisfaction of drawing a
    long breath of fresh, pure air.  You may be an imitation of a horse,
    but you're a mighty poor one."

    "Oh, I cannot hope ever to be like you," sighed the Sawhorse.  "But I
    am glad to meet a last a Real Horse.  You are certainly the most
    beautiful creature I ever beheld."

    This praise won Jim completely.  To be called beautiful was a novelty
    in his experience.  Said he:

    "Your chief fault, my friend, is in being made of wood, and that I
    suppose you cannot help.  Real horses, like myself, are made of flesh
    and blood and bones."

    "I can see the bones all right," replied the Sawhorse, "and they are
    admirable and distinct.  Also I can see the flesh.  But the blood, I
    suppose is tucked away inside."

    "Exactly," said Jim.

    "What good is it?" asked the Sawhorse.

    Jim did not know, but he would not tell the Sawhorse that.

    "If anything cuts me," he replied, "the blood runs out to show where I
    am cut.  You, poor thing! cannot even bleed when you are hurt."

    "But I am never hurt," said the Sawhorse.  "Once in a while I get
    broken up some, but I am easily repaired and put in good order again.
    And I never feel a break or a splinter in the least."

    Jim was almost tempted to envy the wooden horse for being unable to
    feel pain; but the creature was so absurdly unnatural that he decided
    he would not change places with it under any circumstances.

    "How did you happen to be shod with gold?" he asked.

    "Princess Ozma did that," was the reply; "and it saves my legs from
    wearing out.  We've had a good many adventures together, Ozma and I,
    and she likes me."

    The cab-horse was about to reply when suddenly he gave a start and a
    neigh of terror and stood trembling like a leaf.  For around the corner
    had come two enormous savage beasts, treading so lightly that they were
    upon him before he was aware of their presence.  Jim was in the act of
    plunging down the path to escape when the Sawhorse cried out:

    "Stop, my brother!  Stop, Real Horse!  These are friends, and will do
    you no harm."

    Jim hesitated, eyeing the beasts fearfully.  One was an enormous Lion
    with clear, intelligent eyes, a tawney mane bushy and well kept, and a
    body like yellow plush.  The other was a great Tiger with purple
    stripes around his lithe body, powerful limbs, and eyes that showed
    through the half closed lids like coals of fire.  The huge forms of
    these monarchs of the forest and jungle were enough to strike terror to
    the stoutest heart, and it is no wonder Jim was afraid to face them.

    But the Sawhorse introduced the stranger in a calm tone, saying:

    "This, noble Horse, is my friend the Cowardly Lion, who is the valiant
    King of the Forest, but at the same time a faithful vassal of Princess
    Ozma.  And this is the Hungry Tiger, the terror of the jungle, who
    longs to devour fat babies but is prevented by his conscience from
    doing so.  These royal beasts are both warm friends of little Dorothy
    and have come to the Emerald City this morning to welcome her to our
    fairyland."

    Hearing these words Jim resolved to conquer his alarm.  He bowed his
    head with as much dignity as he could muster toward the savage looking
    beasts, who in return nodded in a friendly way.

    "Is not the Real Horse a beautiful animal?" asked the Sawhorse
    admiringly.

    "That is doubtless a matter of taste," returned the Lion.  "In the
    forest he would be thought ungainly, because his face is stretched out
    and his neck is uselessly long.  His joints, I notice, are swollen and
    overgrown, and he lacks flesh and is old in years."

    "And dreadfully tough," added the Hungry Tiger, in a sad voice.  "My
    conscience would never permit me to eat so tough a morsel as the Real
    Horse."

    "I'm glad of that," said Jim; "for I, also, have a conscience, and it
    tells me not to crush in your skull with a blow of my powerful hoof."

    If he thought to frighten the striped beast by such language he was
    mistaken.  The Tiger seemed to smile, and winked one eye slowly.

    "You have a good conscience, friend Horse," it said, "and if you attend
    to its teachings it will do much to protect you from harm.  Some day I
    will let you try to crush in my skull, and afterward you will know more
    about tigers than you do now."

    "Any friend of Dorothy," remarked the Cowardly Lion, "must be our
    friend, as well.  So let us cease this talk of skull crushing and
    converse upon more pleasant subjects.  Have you breakfasted, Sir Horse?"

    "Not yet," replied Jim.  "But here is plenty of excellent clover, so if
    you will excuse me I will eat now."

    "He's a vegetarian," remarked the Tiger, as the horse began to munch
    the clover.  "If I could eat grass I would not need a conscience, for
    nothing could then tempt me to devour babies and lambs."

    Just then Dorothy, who had risen early and heard the voices of the
    animals, ran out to greet her old friends.  She hugged both the Lion
    and the Tiger with eager delight, but seemed to love the King of Beasts
    a little better than she did his hungry friend, having known him longer.

    By this time they had indulged in a good talk and Dorothy had told them
    all about the awful earthquake and her recent adventures, the breakfast
    bell rang from the palace and the little girl went inside to join her
    human comrades.  As she entered the great hall a voice called out, in a
    rather harsh tone:

    "What! are YOU here again?"

    "Yes, I am," she answered, looking all around to see where the voice
    came from.

    "What brought you back?" was the next question, and Dorothy's eye
    rested on an antlered head hanging on the wall just over the fireplace,
    and caught its lips in the act of moving.

    "Good gracious!" she exclaimed.  "I thought you were stuffed."

    "So I am," replied the head.  "But once on a time I was part of the
    Gump, which Ozma sprinkled with the Powder of Life.  I was then for a
    time the Head of the finest Flying Machine that was ever known to
    exist, and we did many wonderful things.  Afterward the Gump was taken
    apart and I was put back on this wall; but I can still talk when I feel
    in the mood, which is not often."

    "It's very strange," said the girl.  "What were you when you were first
    alive?"

    "That I have forgotten," replied the Gump's Head, "and I do not think
    it is of much importance.  But here comes Ozma; so I'd better hush up,
    for the Princess doesn't like me to chatter since she changed her name
    from Tip to Ozma."

    Just then the girlish Ruler of Oz opened the door and greeted Dorothy
    with a good-morning kiss.  The little Princess seemed fresh and rosy
    and in good spirits.

    "Breakfast is served, dear," she said, "and I am hungry.  So don't let
    us keep it waiting a single minute."




    17.  The Nine Tiny Piglets


    After breakfast Ozma announced that she had ordered a holiday to be
    observed throughout the Emerald City, in honor of her visitors.  The
    people had learned that their old Wizard had returned to them and all
    were anxious to see him again, for he had always been a rare favorite.
    So first there was to be a grand procession through the streets, after
    which the little old man was requested to perform some of his
    wizardries in the great Throne Room of the palace.  In the afternoon
    there were to be games and races.

    The procession was very imposing.  First came the Imperial Cornet Band
    of Oz, dressed in emerald velvet uniforms with slashes of pea-green
    satin and buttons of immense cut emeralds.  They played the National
    air called "The Oz Spangled Banner," and behind them were the standard
    bearers with the Royal flag.  This flag was divided into four quarters,
    one being colored sky-blue, another pink, a third lavender and a fourth
    white.  In the center was a large emerald-green star, and all over the
    four quarters were sewn spangles that glittered beautifully in the
    sunshine.  The colors represented the four countries of Oz, and the
    green star the Emerald City.

    Just behind the royal standard-bearers came the Princess Ozma in her
    royal chariot, which was of gold encrusted with emeralds and diamonds
    set in exquisite designs.  The chariot was drawn on this occasion by
    the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, who were decorated with immense
    pink and blue bows.  In the chariot rode Ozma and Dorothy, the former
    in splendid raiment and wearing her royal coronet, while the little
    Kansas girl wore around her waist the Magic Belt she had once captured
    from the Nome King.

    Following the chariot came the Scarecrow mounted on the Sawhorse, and
    the people cheered him almost as loudly as they did their lovely Ruler.
    Behind him stalked with regular, jerky steps, the famous machine-man
    called Tik-tok, who had been wound up by Dorothy for the occasion.
    Tik-tok moved by clockwork, and was made all of burnished copper.  He
    really belonged to the Kansas girl, who had much respect for his
    thoughts after they had been properly wound and set going; but as the
    copper man would be useless in any place but a fairy country Dorothy
    had left him in charge of Ozma, who saw that he was suitably cared for.

    There followed another band after this, which was called the Royal
    Court Band, because the members all lived in the palace.  They wore
    white uniforms with real diamond buttons and played "What is Oz without
    Ozma" very sweetly.

    Then came Professor Woggle-Bug, with a group of students from the Royal
    College of Scientific Athletics.  The boys wore long hair and striped
    sweaters and yelled their college yell every other step they took, to
    the great satisfaction of the populace, which was glad to have this
    evidence that their lungs were in good condition.

    The brilliantly polished Tin Woodman marched next, at the head of the
    Royal Army of Oz which consisted of twenty-eight officers, from
    Generals down to Captains.  There were no privates in the army because
    all were so courageous and skillful that they had been promoted one by
    one until there were no privates left.  Jim and the buggy followed, the
    old cab-horse being driven by Zeb while the Wizard stood up on the seat
    and bowed his bald head right and left in answer to the cheers of the
    people, who crowded thick about him.

    Taken altogether the procession was a grand success, and when it had
    returned to the palace the citizens crowded into the great Throne Room
    to see the Wizard perform his tricks.

    The first thing the little humbug did was to produce a tiny white
    piglet from underneath his hat and pretend to pull it apart, making
    two.  This act he repeated until all of the nine tiny piglets were
    visible, and they were so glad to get out of his pocket that they ran
    around in a very lively manner.  The pretty little creatures would have
    been a novelty anywhere, so the people were as amazed and delighted at
    their appearance as even the Wizard could have desired.  When he had
    made them all disappear again Ozma declared she was sorry they were
    gone, for she wanted one of them to pet and play with.  So the Wizard
    pretended to take one of the piglets out of the hair of the Princess
    (while really he slyly took it from his inside pocket) and Ozma smiled
    joyously as the creature nestled in her arms, and she promised to have
    an emerald collar made for its fat neck and to keep the little squealer
    always at hand to amuse her.

    Afterward it was noticed that the Wizard always performed his famous
    trick with eight piglets, but it seemed to please the people just as
    well as if there had been nine of them.

    In his little room back of the Throne Room the Wizard had found a lot
    of things he had left behind him when he went away in the balloon, for
    no one had occupied the apartment in his absence.  There was enough
    material there to enable him to prepare several new tricks which he had
    learned from some of the jugglers in the circus, and he had passed part
    of the night in getting them ready.  So he followed the trick of the
    nine tiny piglets with several other wonderful feats that greatly
    delighted his audience and the people did not seem to care a bit
    whether the little man was a humbug Wizard or not, so long as he
    succeeded in amusing them.  They applauded all his tricks and at the
    end of the performance begged him earnestly not to go away again and
    leave them.

    "In that case," said the little man, gravely, "I will cancel all of my
    engagements before the crowned heads of Europe and America and devote
    myself to the people of Oz, for I love you all so well that I can deny
    you nothing."

    After the people had been dismissed with this promise our friends
    joined Princess Ozma at an elaborate luncheon in the palace, where even
    the Tiger and the Lion were sumptuously fed and Jim the Cab-horse ate
    his oatmeal out of a golden bowl with seven rows of rubies, sapphires
    and diamonds set around the rim of it.

    In the afternoon they all went to a great field outside the city gates
    where the games were to be held.  There was a beautiful canopy for Ozma
    and her guests to sit under and watch the people run races and jump and
    wrestle.  You may be sure the folks of Oz did their best with such a
    distinguished company watching them, and finally Zeb offered to wrestle
    with a little Munchkin who seemed to be the champion.  In appearance he
    was twice as old as Zeb, for he had long pointed whiskers and wore a
    peaked hat with little bells all around the brim of it, which tinkled
    gaily as he moved.  But although the Munchkin was hardly tall enough to
    come to Zeb's shoulder he was so strong and clever that he laid the boy
    three times on his back with apparent ease.

    Zeb was greatly astonished at his defeat, and when the pretty Princess
    joined her people in laughing at him he proposed a boxing-match with
    the Munchkin, to which the little Ozite readily agreed.  But the first
    time that Zeb managed to give him a sharp box on the ears the Munchkin
    sat down upon the ground and cried until the tears ran down his
    whiskers, because he had been hurt.  This made Zeb laugh, in turn, and
    the boy felt comforted to find that Ozma laughed as merrily at her
    weeping subject as she had at him.

    Just then the Scarecrow proposed a race between the Sawhorse and the
    Cab-horse; and although all the others were delighted at the suggestion
    the Sawhorse drew back, saying:

    "Such a race would not be fair."

    "Of course not," added Jim, with a touch of scorn; "those little wooden
    legs of yours are not half as long as my own."

    "It isn't that," said the Sawhorse, modestly; "but I never tire, and
    you do."

    "Bah!" cried Jim, looking with great disdain at the other; "do you
    imagine for an instant that such a shabby imitation of a horse as you
    are can run as fast as I?"

    "I don't know, I'm sure," replied the Sawhorse.

    "That is what we are trying to find out," remarked the Scarecrow.  "The
    object of a race is to see who can win it - or at least that is what my
    excellent brains think."

    "Once, when I was young," said Jim, "I was a race horse, and defeated
    all who dared run against me.  I was born in Kentucky, you know, where
    all the best and most aristocratic horses come from."

    "But you're old, now, Jim," suggested Zeb.

    "Old!  Why, I feel like a colt today," replied Jim.  "I only wish there
    was a real horse here for me to race with.  I'd show the people a fine
    sight, I can tell you."

    "Then why not race with the Sawhorse?" enquired the Scarecrow.

    "He's afraid," said Jim.

    "Oh, no," answered the Sawhorse.  "I merely said it wasn't fair.  But
    if my friend the Real Horse is willing to undertake the race I am quite
    ready."

    So they unharnessed Jim and took the saddle off the Sawhorse, and the
    two queerly matched animals were stood side by side for the start.

    "When I say 'Go!'" Zeb called to them, "you must dig out and race until
    you reach those three trees you see over yonder.  Then circle 'round
    them and come back again.  The first one that passes the place where
    the Princess sits shall be named the winner.  Are you ready?"

    "I suppose I ought to give the wooden dummy a good start of me,"
    growled Jim.

    "Never mind that," said the Sawhorse.  "I'll do the best I can."

    "Go!" cried Zeb; and at the word the two horses leaped forward and the
    race was begun.

    Jim's big hoofs pounded away at a great rate, and although he did not
    look very graceful he ran in a way to do credit to his Kentucky
    breeding.  But the Sawhorse was swifter than the wind.  Its wooden legs
    moved so fast that their twinkling could scarcely be seen, and although
    so much smaller than the cab-horse it covered the ground much faster.
    Before they had reached the trees the Sawhorse was far ahead, and the
    wooden animal returned to the starting place as was being lustily
    cheered by the Ozites before Jim came panting up to the canopy where
    the Princess and her friends were seated.

    I am sorry to record the fact that Jim was not only ashamed of his
    defeat but for a moment lost control of his temper.  As he looked at
    the comical face of the Sawhorse he imagined that the creature was
    laughing at him; so in a fit of unreasonable anger he turned around and
    made a vicious kick that sent his rival tumbling head over heels upon
    the ground, and broke off one of its legs and its left ear.

    An instant later the Tiger crouched and launched its huge body through
    the air swift and resistless as a ball from a cannon.  The beast struck
    Jim full on his shoulder and sent the astonished cab-horse rolling over
    and over, amid shouts of delight from the spectators, who had been
    horrified by the ungracious act he had been guilty of.

    When Jim came to himself and sat upon his haunches he found the
    Cowardly Lion crouched on one side of him and the Hungry Tiger on the
    other, and their eyes were glowing like balls of fire.

    "I beg your pardon, I'm sure," said Jim, meekly.  "I was wrong to kick
    the Sawhorse, and I am sorry I became angry at him.  He has won the
    race, and won it fairly; but what can a horse of flesh do against a
    tireless beast of wood?"

    Hearing this apology the Tiger and the Lion stopped lashing their tails
    and retreated with dignified steps to the side of the Princess.

    "No one must injure one of our friends in our presence," growled the
    Lion; and Zeb ran to Jim and whispered that unless he controlled his
    temper in the future he would probably be torn to pieces.

    Then the Tin Woodman cut a straight and strong limb from a tree with
    his gleaming axe and made a new leg and a new ear for the Sawhorse; and
    when they had been securely fastened in place Princess Ozma took the
    coronet from her own head and placed it upon that of the winner of the
    race.  Said she:

    "My friend, I reward you for your swiftness by proclaiming you Prince
    of Horses, whether of wood or of flesh; and hereafter all other
    horses - in the Land of Oz, at least - must be considered imitations, and
    you the real Champion of your race."

    There was more applause at this, and then Ozma had the jewelled saddle
    replaced upon the Sawhorse and herself rode the victor back to the city
    at the head of the grand procession.

    "I ought to be a fairy," grumbled Jim, as he slowly drew the buggy
    home; "for to be just an ordinary horse in a fairy country is to be of
    no account whatever.  It's no place for us, Zeb."

    "It's lucky we got here, though," said the boy; and Jim thought of the
    dark cave, and agreed with him.




    18.  The Trial of Eureka the Kitten


    Several days of festivity and merry-making followed, for such old
    friends did not often meet and there was much to be told and talked
    over between them, and many amusements to be enjoyed in this delightful
    country.

    Ozma was happy to have Dorothy beside her, for girls of her own age
    with whom it was proper for the Princess to associate were very few,
    and often the youthful Ruler of Oz was lonely for lack of companionship.

    It was the third morning after Dorothy's arrival, and she was sitting
    with Ozma and their friends in a reception room, talking over old
    times, when the Princess said to her maid:

    "Please go to my boudoir, Jellia, and get the white piglet I left on
    the dressing-table.  I want to play with it."

    Jellia at once departed on the errand, and she was gone so long that
    they had almost forgotten her mission when the green robed maiden
    returned with a troubled face.

    "The piglet is not there, your Highness," said she.

    "Not there!" exclaimed Ozma.  "Are you sure?"

    "I have hunted in every part of the room," the maid replied.

    "Was not the door closed?" asked the Princess.

    "Yes, your Highness; I am sure it was; for when I opened it Dorothy's
    white kitten crept out and ran up the stairs."

    Hearing this, Dorothy and the Wizard exchanged startled glances, for
    they remembered how often Eureka had longed to eat a piglet.  The
    little girl jumped up at once.

    "Come, Ozma," she said, anxiously; "let us go ourselves to search for
    the piglet."

    So the two went to the dressing-room of the Princess and searched
    carefully in every corner and among the vases and baskets and ornaments
    that stood about the pretty boudoir.  But not a trace could they find
    of the tiny creature they sought.

    Dorothy was nearly weeping, by this time, while Ozma was angry and
    indignant.  When they returned to the others the Princess said:

    "There is little doubt that my pretty piglet has been eaten by that
    horrid kitten, and if that is true the offender must be punished."

    "I don't b'lieve Eureka would do such a dreadful thing!" cried Dorothy,
    much distressed.  "Go and get my kitten, please, Jellia, and we'll hear
    what she has to say about it."

    The green maiden hastened away, but presently returned and said:

    "The kitten will not come.  She threatened to scratch my eyes out if I
    touched her."

    "Where is she?" asked Dorothy.

    "Under the bed in your own room," was the reply.

    So Dorothy ran to her room and found the kitten under the bed.

    "Come here, Eureka!" she said.

    "I won't," answered the kitten, in a surly voice.

    "Oh, Eureka!  Why are you so bad?"

    The kitten did not reply.

    "If you don't come to me, right away," continued Dorothy, getting
    provoked, "I'll take my Magic Belt and wish you in the Country of the
    Gurgles."

    "Why do you want me?" asked Eureka, disturbed by this threat.

    "You must go to Princess Ozma.  She wants to talk to you."

    "All right," returned the kitten, creeping out.  "I'm not afraid of
    Ozma - or anyone else."

    Dorothy carried her in her arms back to where the others sat in grieved
    and thoughtful silence.

    "Tell me, Eureka," said the Princess, gently: "did you eat my pretty
    piglet?"

    "I won't answer such a foolish question," asserted Eureka, with a snarl.

    "Oh, yes you will, dear," Dorothy declared.  "The piglet is gone, and
    you ran out of the room when Jellia opened the door.  So, if you are
    innocent, Eureka, you must tell the Princess how you came to be in her
    room, and what has become of the piglet."

    "Who accuses me?" asked the kitten, defiantly.

    "No one," answered Ozma.  "Your actions alone accuse you.  The fact is
    that I left my little pet in my dressing-room lying asleep upon the
    table; and you must have stolen in without my knowing it.  When next
    the door was opened you ran out and hid yourself - and the piglet was
    gone."

    "That's none of my business," growled the kitten.

    "Don't be impudent, Eureka," admonished Dorothy.

    "It is you who are impudent," said Eureka, "for accusing me of such a
    crime when you can't prove it except by guessing."

    Ozma was now greatly incensed by the kitten's conduct.  She summoned
    her Captain-General, and when the long, lean officer appeared she said:

    "Carry this cat away to prison, and keep her in safe confinement until
    she is tried by law for the crime of murder."

    So the Captain-General took Eureka from the arms of the now weeping
    Dorothy and in spite of the kitten's snarls and scratches carried it
    away to prison.

    "What shall we do now?" asked the Scarecrow, with a sigh, for such a
    crime had cast a gloom over all the company.

    "I will summon the Court to meet in the Throne Room at three o'clock,"
    replied Ozma.  "I myself will be the judge, and the kitten shall have a
    fair trial."

    "What will happen if she is guilty?" asked Dorothy.

    "She must die," answered the Princess.

    "Nine times?" enquired the Scarecrow.

    "As many times as is necessary," was the reply.  "I will ask the Tin
    Woodman to defend the prisoner, because he has such a kind heart I am
    sure he will do his best to save her.  And the Woggle-Bug shall be the
    Public Accuser, because he is so learned that no one can deceive him."

    "Who will be the jury?" asked the Tin Woodman.

    "There ought to be several animals on the jury," said Ozma, "because
    animals understand each other better than we people understand them.
    So the jury shall consist of the Cowardly Lion, the Hungry Tiger, Jim
    the Cab-horse, the Yellow Hen, the Scarecrow, the Wizard, Tik-tok the
    Machine Man, the Sawhorse and Zeb of Hugson's Ranch.  That makes the
    nine which the law requires, and all my people shall be admitted to
    hear the testimony."

    They now separated to prepare for the sad ceremony; for whenever an
    appeal is made to law sorrow is almost certain to follow - even in a
    fairyland like Oz.  But is must be stated that the people of that Land
    were generally so well-behaved that there was not a single lawyer
    amongst them, and it had been years since any Ruler had sat in judgment
    upon an offender of the law.  The crime of murder being the most
    dreadful crime of all, tremendous excitement prevailed in the Emerald
    City when the news of Eureka's arrest and trial became known.

    The Wizard, when he returned to his own room, was exceedingly
    thoughtful.  He had no doubt Eureka had eaten his piglet, but he
    realized that a kitten cannot be depended upon at all times to act
    properly, since its nature is to destroy small animals and even birds
    for food, and the tame cat that we keep in our houses today is
    descended from the wild cat of the jungle - a very ferocious creature,
    indeed.  The Wizard knew that if Dorothy's pet was found guilty and
    condemned to death the little girl would be made very unhappy; so,
    although he grieved over the piglet's sad fate as much as any of them,
    he resolved to save Eureka's life.

    Sending for the Tin Woodman the Wizard took him into a corner and
    whispered:

    "My friend, it is your duty to defend the white kitten and try to save
    her, but I fear you will fail because Eureka has long wished to eat a
    piglet, to my certain knowledge, and my opinion is that she has been
    unable to resist the temptation.  Yet her disgrace and death would not
    bring back the piglet, but only serve to make Dorothy unhappy.  So I
    intend to prove the kitten's innocence by a trick."

    He drew from his inside pocket one of the eight tiny piglets that were
    remaining and continued:

    "This creature you must hide in some safe place, and if the jury
    decides that Eureka is guilty you may then produce this piglet and
    claim it is the one that was lost.  All the piglets are exactly alike,
    so no one can dispute your word.  This deception will save Eureka's
    life, and then we may all be happy again."

    "I do not like to deceive my friends," replied the Tin Woodman; "still,
    my kind heart urges me to save Eureka's life, and I can usually trust
    my heart to do the right thing.  So I will do as you say, friend
    Wizard."

    After some thought he placed the little pig inside his funnel-shaped
    hat, and then put the hat upon his head and went back to his room to
    think over his speech to the jury.




    19.  The Wizard Performs Another Trick


    At three o'clock the Throne Room was crowded with citizens, men, women
    and children being eager to witness the great trial.

    Princess Ozma, dressed in her most splendid robes of state, sat in the
    magnificent emerald throne, with her jewelled sceptre in her hand and
    her sparkling coronet upon her fair brow.  Behind her throne stood the
    twenty-eight officers of her army and many officials of the royal
    household.  At her right sat the queerly assorted Jury - animals,
    animated dummies and people - all gravely prepared to listen to what was
    said.  The kitten had been placed in a large cage just before the
    throne, where she sat upon her haunches and gazed through the bars at
    the crowds around her, with seeming unconcern.

    And now, at a signal from Ozma, the Woggle-Bug arose and addressed the
    jury.  His tone was pompous and he strutted up and down in an absurd
    attempt to appear dignified.

    "Your Royal Highness and Fellow Citizens," he began; "the small cat you
    see a prisoner before you is accused of the crime of first murdering
    and then eating our esteemed Ruler's fat piglet - or else first eating
    and then murdering it.  In either case a grave crime has been committed
    which deserves a grave punishment."

    "Do you mean my kitten must be put in a grave?" asked Dorothy.

    "Don't interrupt, little girl," said the Woggle-Bug.  "When I get my
    thoughts arranged in good order I do not like to have anything upset
    them or throw them into confusion."

    "If your thoughts were any good they wouldn't become confused,"
    remarked the Scarecrow, earnestly.  "My thoughts are always - "

    "Is this a trial of thoughts, or of kittens?" demanded the Woggle-Bug.

    "It's a trial of one kitten," replied the Scarecrow; "but your manner
    is a trial to us all."

    "Let the Public Accuser continue," called Ozma from her throne, "and I
    pray you do not interrupt him."

    "The criminal who now sits before the court licking her paws," resumed
    the Woggle-Bug, "has long desired to unlawfully eat the fat piglet,
    which was no bigger than a mouse.  And finally she made a wicked plan
    to satisfy her depraved appetite for pork. I can see her, in my mind's
    eye - "

    "What's that?" asked the Scarecrow.

    "I say I can see her in my mind's eye - "

    "The mind has no eye," declared the Scarecrow.  "It's blind."

    "Your Highness," cried the Woggle-Bug, appealing to Ozma, "have I a
    mind's eye, or haven't I?"

    "If you have, it is invisible," said the Princess.

    "Very true," returned the Woggle-Bug, bowing.  "I say I see the
    criminal, in my mind's eye, creeping stealthily into the room of our
    Ozma and secreting herself, when no one was looking, until the Princess
    had gone away and the door was closed.  Then the murderer was alone
    with her helpless victim, the fat piglet, and I see her pounce upon the
    innocent creature and eat it up - "

    "Are you still seeing with your mind's eye?" enquired the Scarecrow.

    "Of course; how else could I see it?  And we know the thing is true,
    because since the time of that interview there is no piglet to be found
    anywhere."

    "I suppose, if the cat had been gone, instead of the piglet, your
    mind's eye would see the piglet eating the cat," suggested the
    Scarecrow.

    "Very likely," acknowledged the Woggle-Bug.  "And now, Fellow Citizens
    and Creatures of the Jury, I assert that so awful a crime deserves
    death, and in the case of the ferocious criminal before you - who is now
    washing her face - the death penalty should be inflicted nine times."

    There was great applause when the speaker sat down.  Then the Princess
    spoke in a stern voice:

    "Prisoner, what have you to say for yourself?  Are you guilty, or not
    guilty?"

    "Why, that's for you to find out," replied Eureka.  "If you can prove
    I'm guilty, I'll be willing to die nine times, but a mind's eye is no
    proof, because the Woggle-Bug has no mind to see with."

    "Never mind, dear," said Dorothy.

    Then the Tin Woodman arose and said:

    "Respected Jury and dearly beloved Ozma, I pray you not to judge this
    feline prisoner unfeelingly.  I do not think the innocent kitten can be
    guilty, and surely it is unkind to accuse a luncheon of being a murder.
    Eureka is the sweet pet of a lovely little girl whom we all admire, and
    gentleness and innocence are her chief virtues.  Look at the kitten's
    intelligent eyes;" (here Eureka closed her eyes sleepily) "gaze at her
    smiling countenance!" (here Eureka snarled and showed her teeth) "mark
    the tender pose of her soft, padded little hands!"  (Here Eureka bared
    her sharp claws and scratched at the bars of the cage.) "Would such a
    gentle animal be guilty of eating a fellow creature?  No; a thousand
    times, no!"

    "Oh, cut it short," said Eureka; "you've talked long enough."

    "I'm trying to defend you," remonstrated the Tin Woodman.

    "Then say something sensible," retorted the kitten.  "Tell them it
    would be foolish for me to eat the piglet, because I had sense enough
    to know it would raise a row if I did.  But don't try to make out I'm
    too innocent to eat a fat piglet if I could do it and not be found out.
    I imagine it would taste mighty good."

    "Perhaps it would, to those who eat," remarked the Tin Woodman.  "I
    myself, not being built to eat, have no personal experience in such
    matters.  But I remember that our great poet once said:

      'To eat is sweet
      When hunger's seat
      Demands a treat
      Of savory meat.'"


    "Take this into consideration, friends of the Jury, and you will
    readily decide that the kitten is wrongfully accused and should be set
    at liberty."

    When the Tin Woodman sat down no one applauded him, for his arguments
    had not been very convincing and few believed that he had proved
    Eureka's innocence.  As for the Jury, the members whispered to each
    other for a few minutes and then they appointed the Hungry Tiger their
    spokesman.  The huge beast slowly arose and said:

    "Kittens have no consciences, so they eat whatever pleases them.  The
    jury believes the white kitten known as Eureka is guilty of having
    eaten the piglet owned by Princess Ozma, and recommends that she be put
    to death in punishment of the crime."

    The judgment of the jury was received with great applause, although
    Dorothy was sobbing miserably at the fate of her pet.  The Princess was
    just about to order Eureka's head chopped off with the Tin Woodman's
    axe when that brilliant personage once more arose and addressed her.

    "Your Highness," said he, "see how easy it is for a jury to be
    mistaken.  The kitten could not have eaten your piglet - for here it is!"

    He took off his funnel hat and from beneath it produced a tiny white
    piglet, which he held aloft that all might see it clearly.

    Ozma was delighted and exclaimed, eagerly:

    "Give me my pet, Nick Chopper!"

    And all the people cheered and clapped their hands, rejoicing that the
    prisoner had escaped death and been proved to be innocent.

    As the Princess held the white piglet in her arms and stroked its soft
    hair she said: "Let Eureka out of the cage, for she is no longer a
    prisoner, but our good friend.  Where did you find my missing pet, Nick
    Chopper?"

    "In a room of the palace," he answered.

    "Justice," remarked the Scarecrow, with a sigh, "is a dangerous thing
    to meddle with.  If you hadn't happened to find the piglet, Eureka
    would surely have been executed."

    "But justice prevailed at the last," said Ozma, "for here is my pet,
    and Eureka is once more free."

    "I refuse to be free," cried the kitten, in a sharp voice, "unless the
    Wizard can do his trick with eight piglets.  If he can produce but
    seven, then this is not the piglet that was lost, but another one."

    "Hush, Eureka!" warned the Wizard.

    "Don't be foolish," advised the Tin Woodman, "or you may be sorry for
    it."

    "The piglet that belonged to the Princess wore an emerald collar," said
    Eureka, loudly enough for all to hear.

    "So it did!" exclaimed Ozma.  "This cannot be the one the Wizard gave
    me."

    "Of course not; he had nine of them, altogether," declared Eureka; "and
    I must say it was very stingy of him not to let me eat just a few.  But
    now that this foolish trial is ended, I will tell you what really
    became of your pet piglet."

    At this everyone in the Throne Room suddenly became quiet, and the
    kitten continued, in a calm, mocking tone of voice:

    "I will confess that I intended to eat the little pig for my breakfast;
    so I crept into the room where it was kept while the Princess was
    dressing and hid myself under a chair.  When Ozma went away she closed
    the door and left her pet on the table.  At once I jumped up and told
    the piglet not to make a fuss, for he would be inside of me in half a
    second; but no one can teach one of these creatures to be reasonable.
    Instead of keeping still, so I could eat him comfortably, he trembled
    so with fear that he fell off the table into a big vase that was
    standing on the floor.  The vase had a very small neck, and spread out
    at the top like a bowl.  At first the piglet stuck in the neck of the
    vase and I thought I should get him, after all, but he wriggled himself
    through and fell down into the deep bottom part - and I suppose he's
    there yet."

    All were astonished at this confession, and Ozma at once sent an
    officer to her room to fetch the vase.  When he returned the Princess
    looked down the narrow neck of the big ornament and discovered her lost
    piglet, just as Eureka had said she would.

    There was no way to get the creature out without breaking the vase, so
    the Tin Woodman smashed it with his axe and set the little prisoner
    free.

    Then the crowd cheered lustily and Dorothy hugged the kitten in her
    arms and told her how delighted she was to know that she was innocent.

    "But why didn't you tell us at first?" she asked.

    "It would have spoiled the fun," replied the kitten, yawning.

    Ozma gave the Wizard back the piglet he had so kindly allowed Nick
    Chopper to substitute for the lost one, and then she carried her own
    into the apartments of the palace where she lived.  And now, the trial
    being over, the good citizens of the Emerald City scattered to their
    homes, well content with the day's amusement.




    20.  Zeb Returns to the Ranch


    Eureka was much surprised to find herself in disgrace; but she was, in
    spite of the fact that she had not eaten the piglet.  For the folks of
    Oz knew the kitten had tried to commit the crime, and that only an
    accident had prevented her from doing so; therefore even the Hungry
    Tiger preferred not to associate with her.  Eureka was forbidden to
    wander around the palace and was made to stay in confinement in
    Dorothy's room; so she began to beg her mistress to send her to some
    other place where she could enjoy herself better.

    Dorothy was herself anxious to get home, so she promised Eureka they
    would not stay in the Land of Oz much longer.

    The next evening after the trial the little girl begged Ozma to allow
    her to look in the enchanted picture, and the Princess readily
    consented.  She took the child to her room and said: "Make your wish,
    dear, and the picture will show the scene you desire to behold."

    Then Dorothy found, with the aid of the enchanted picture, that Uncle
    Henry had returned to the farm in Kansas, and she also saw that both he
    and Aunt Em were dressed in mourning, because they thought their little
    niece had been killed by the earthquake.

    "Really," said the girl, anxiously, "I must get back as soon as
    poss'ble to my own folks."

    Zeb also wanted to see his home, and although he did not find anyone
    morning for him, the sight of Hugson's Ranch in the picture made him
    long to get back there.

    "This is a fine country, and I like all the people that live in it," he
    told Dorothy.  "But the fact is, Jim and I don't seem to fit into a
    fairyland, and the old horse has been begging me to go home again ever
    since he lost the race.  So, if you can find a way to fix it, we'll be
    much obliged to you."

    "Ozma can do it, easily," replied Dorothy.  "Tomorrow morning I'll go
    to Kansas and you can go to Californy."

    That last evening was so delightful that the boy will never forget it
    as long as he lives.  They were all together (except Eureka) in the
    pretty rooms of the Princess, and the Wizard did some new tricks, and
    the Scarecrow told stories, and the Tin Woodman sang a love song in a
    sonorous, metallic voice, and everybody laughed and had a good time.
    Then Dorothy wound up Tik-tok and he danced a jig to amuse the company,
    after which the Yellow Hen related some of her adventures with the Nome
    King in the Land of Ev.

    The Princess served delicious refreshments to those who were in the
    habit of eating, and when Dorothy's bed time arrived the company
    separated after exchanging many friendly sentiments.

    Next morning they all assembled for the final parting, and many of the
    officials and courtiers came to look upon the impressive ceremonies.

    Dorothy held Eureka in her arms and bade her friends a fond good-bye.

    "You must come again, some time," said the little Wizard; and she
    promised she would if she found it possible to do so.

    "But Uncle Henry and Aunt Em need me to help them," she added, "so I
    can't ever be very long away from the farm in Kansas."

    Ozma wore the Magic Belt; and, when she had kissed Dorothy farewell and
    had made her wish, the little girl and her kitten disappeared in a
    twinkling.

    "Where is she?" asked Zeb, rather bewildered by the suddenness of it.

    "Greeting her uncle and aunt in Kansas, by this time," returned Ozma,
    with a smile.

    Then Zeb brought out Jim, all harnessed to the buggy, and took his seat.

    "I'm much obliged for all your kindness," said the boy, "and very
    grateful to you for saving my life and sending me home again after all
    the good times I've had.  I think this is the loveliest country in the
    world; but not being fairies Jim and I feel we ought to be where we
    belong - and that's at the ranch.  Good-bye, everybody!"

    He gave a start and rubbed his eyes.  Jim was trotting along the
    well-known road, shaking his ears and whisking his tail with a
    contented motion.  Just ahead of them were the gates of Hugson's Ranch,
    and Uncle Hugson now came out and stood with uplifted arms and wide
    open mouth, staring in amazement.

    "Goodness gracious!  It's Zeb - and Jim, too!" he exclaimed.  "Where in
    the world have you been, my lad?"

    "Why, in the world, Uncle," answered Zeb, with a laugh.
  </content>
</note>
CREATE
<note>
  <guid>787B2D57-1A8E-4000-991B-BE9BCAAB2FC5</guid>
  <created>2014-04-04T04:12:31Z</created>
  <tag>fiction</tag>
  <tag>novel</tag>
  <tag>pyle</tag>
  <tag>hood</tag>
  <tag>rich</tag>
  <tag>poor</tag>
  <content>
    THE MERRY ADVENTURES OF ROBIN HOOD

    by Howard Pyle



    PREFACE

    FROM THE AUTHOR TO THE READER


    You who so plod amid serious things that you feel it shame to give
    yourself up even for a few short moments to mirth and joyousness in the
    land of Fancy; you who think that life hath nought to do with innocent
    laughter that can harm no one; these pages are not for you. Clap to the
    leaves and go no farther than this, for I tell you plainly that if you
    go farther you will be scandalized by seeing good, sober folks of real
    history so frisk and caper in gay colors and motley that you would
    not know them but for the names tagged to them. Here is a stout, lusty
    fellow with a quick temper, yet none so ill for all that, who goes by
    the name of Henry II. Here is a fair, gentle lady before whom all the
    others bow and call her Queen Eleanor. Here is a fat rogue of a fellow,
    dressed up in rich robes of a clerical kind, that all the good folk call
    my Lord Bishop of Hereford. Here is a certain fellow with a sour temper
    and a grim look - the worshipful, the Sheriff of Nottingham. And here,
    above all, is a great, tall, merry fellow that roams the greenwood and
    joins in homely sports, and sits beside the Sheriff at merry feast,
    which same beareth the name of the proudest of the Plantagenets - Richard
    of the Lion's Heart. Beside these are a whole host of knights, priests,
    nobles, burghers, yeomen, pages, ladies, lasses, landlords, beggars,
    peddlers, and what not, all living the merriest of merry lives, and all
    bound by nothing but a few odd strands of certain old ballads (snipped
    and clipped and tied together again in a score of knots) which draw
    these jocund fellows here and there, singing as they go.

    Here you will find a hundred dull, sober, jogging places, all tricked
    out with flowers and what not, till no one would know them in their
    fanciful dress. And here is a country bearing a well-known name, wherein
    no chill mists press upon our spirits, and no rain falls but what rolls
    off our backs like April showers off the backs of sleek drakes; where
    flowers bloom forever and birds are always singing; where every fellow
    hath a merry catch as he travels the roads, and ale and beer and wine
    (such as muddle no wits) flow like water in a brook.

    This country is not Fairyland. What is it? 'Tis the land of Fancy, and
    is of that pleasant kind that, when you tire of it - whisk! - you clap
    the leaves of this book together and 'tis gone, and you are ready for
    everyday life, with no harm done.

    And now I lift the curtain that hangs between here and No-man's-land.
    Will you come with me, sweet Reader? I thank you. Give me your hand.



    CONTENTS

         CHAPTER                                                PAGE

         I         HOW ROBIN HOOD CAME TO BE AN OUTLAW            1
         II        ROBIN HOOD AND THE TINKER                     14
         III       THE SHOOTING MATCH AT NOTTINGHAM TOWN         27
         IV        WILL STUTELY RESCUED BY HIS COMPANIONS        38
         V         ROBIN HOOD TURNS BUTCHER                      50
         VI        LITTLE JOHN GOES TO NOTTINGHAM FAIR           61
         VII       HOW LITTLE JOHN LIVED AT THE SHERIFF'S        68
         VIII      LITTLE JOHN AND THE TANNER OF BLYTH           81
         IX        ROBIN HOOD AND WILL SCARLET                   92
         X         THE ADVENTURE WITH MIDGE, THE MILLER'S SON   102
         Xl        ROBIN HOOD AND ALLAN A DALE                  115
         XII       ROBIN HOOD SEEKS THE CURTAL FRIAR            129
         XIII      ROBIN HOOD COMPASSES A MARRIAGE              145
         XIV       ROBIN HOOD AIDS A SORROWFUL KNIGHT           156
         XV        HOW SIR RICHARD OF THE LEA PAID HIS DEBTS    172
         XVI       LITTLE JOHN TURNS BAREFOOT FRIAR             186
         XVII      ROBIN HOOD TURNS BEGGAR                      202
         XVIII     ROBIN HOOD SHOOTS BEFORE QUEEN ELEANOR       222
         XIX       THE CHASE OF ROBIN HOOD                      243
         XX        ROBIN HOOD AND GUY OF GISBOURNE              262
         XXI       KING RICHARD COMES TO SHERWOOD FOREST        281
         EPILOGUE                                     300





    How Robin Hood Cane to Be an Outlaw

    IN MERRY ENGLAND in the time of old, when good King Henry the Second
    ruled the land, there lived within the green glades of Sherwood Forest,
    near Nottingham Town, a famous outlaw whose name was Robin Hood. No
    archer ever lived that could speed a gray goose shaft with such skill
    and cunning as his, nor were there ever such yeomen as the sevenscore
    merry men that roamed with him through the greenwood shades. Right
    merrily they dwelled within the depths of Sherwood Forest, suffering
    neither care nor want, but passing the time in merry games of archery or
    bouts of cudgel play, living upon the King's venison, washed down with
    draughts of ale of October brewing.

    Not only Robin himself but all the band were outlaws and dwelled apart
    from other men, yet they were beloved by the country people round about,
    for no one ever came to jolly Robin for help in time of need and went
    away again with an empty fist.

    And now I will tell how it came about that Robin Hood fell afoul of the
    law.

    When Robin was a youth of eighteen, stout of sinew and bold of heart,
    the Sheriff of Nottingham proclaimed a shooting match and offered a
    prize of a butt of ale to whosoever should shoot the best shaft in
    Nottinghamshire. "Now," quoth Robin, "will I go too, for fain would I
    draw a string for the bright eyes of my lass and a butt of good October
    brewing." So up he got and took his good stout yew bow and a score
    or more of broad clothyard arrows, and started off from Locksley Town
    through Sherwood Forest to Nottingham.

    It was at the dawn of day in the merry Maytime, when hedgerows are green
    and flowers bedeck the meadows; daisies pied and yellow cuckoo buds and
    fair primroses all along the briery hedges; when apple buds blossom and
    sweet birds sing, the lark at dawn of day, the throstle cock and cuckoo;
    when lads and lasses look upon each other with sweet thoughts; when busy
    housewives spread their linen to bleach upon the bright green grass.
    Sweet was the greenwood as he walked along its paths, and bright the
    green and rustling leaves, amid which the little birds sang with might
    and main: and blithely Robin whistled as he trudged along, thinking of
    Maid Marian and her bright eyes, for at such times a youth's thoughts
    are wont to turn pleasantly upon the lass that he loves the best.

    As thus he walked along with a brisk step and a merry whistle, he came
    suddenly upon some foresters seated beneath a great oak tree. Fifteen
    there were in all, making themselves merry with feasting and drinking
    as they sat around a huge pasty, to which each man helped himself,
    thrusting his hands into the pie, and washing down that which they ate
    with great horns of ale which they drew all foaming from a barrel that
    stood nigh. Each man was clad in Lincoln green, and a fine show they
    made, seated upon the sward beneath that fair, spreading tree. Then one
    of them, with his mouth full, called out to Robin, "Hulloa, where goest
    thou, little lad, with thy one-penny bow and thy farthing shafts?"

    Then Robin grew angry, for no stripling likes to be taunted with his
    green years.

    "Now," quoth he, "my bow and eke mine arrows are as good as shine; and
    moreover, I go to the shooting match at Nottingham Town, which same has
    been proclaimed by our good Sheriff of Nottinghamshire; there I will
    shoot with other stout yeomen, for a prize has been offered of a fine
    butt of ale."

    Then one who held a horn of ale in his hand said, "Ho! listen to the
    lad! Why, boy, thy mother's milk is yet scarce dry upon thy lips, and
    yet thou pratest of standing up with good stout men at Nottingham butts,
    thou who art scarce able to draw one string of a two-stone bow."

    "I'll hold the best of you twenty marks," quoth bold Robin, "that I hit
    the clout at threescore rods, by the good help of Our Lady fair."

    At this all laughed aloud, and one said, "Well boasted, thou fair
    infant, well boasted! And well thou knowest that no target is nigh to
    make good thy wager."

    And another cried, "He will be taking ale with his milk next."

    At this Robin grew right mad. "Hark ye," said he, "yonder, at the
    glade's end, I see a herd of deer, even more than threescore rods
    distant. I'll hold you twenty marks that, by leave of Our Lady, I cause
    the best hart among them to die."

    "Now done!" cried he who had spoken first. "And here are twenty marks. I
    wager that thou causest no beast to die, with or without the aid of Our
    Lady."

    Then Robin took his good yew bow in his hand, and placing the tip at
    his instep, he strung it right deftly; then he nocked a broad clothyard
    arrow and, raising the bow, drew the gray goose feather to his ear; the
    next moment the bowstring rang and the arrow sped down the glade as a
    sparrowhawk skims in a northern wind. High leaped the noblest hart
    of all the herd, only to fall dead, reddening the green path with his
    heart's blood.

    "Ha!" cried Robin, "how likest thou that shot, good fellow? I wot the
    wager were mine, an it were three hundred pounds."

    Then all the foresters were filled with rage, and he who had spoken the
    first and had lost the wager was more angry than all.

    "Nay," cried he, "the wager is none of thine, and get thee gone,
    straightway, or, by all the saints of heaven, I'll baste thy sides
    until thou wilt ne'er be able to walk again." "Knowest thou not," said
    another, "that thou hast killed the King's deer, and, by the laws of
    our gracious lord and sovereign King Harry, thine ears should be shaven
    close to thy head?"

    "Catch him!" cried a third.

    "Nay," said a fourth, "let him e'en go because of his tender years."

    Never a word said Robin Hood, but he looked at the foresters with a grim
    face; then, turning on his heel, strode away from them down the forest
    glade. But his heart was bitterly angry, for his blood was hot and
    youthful and prone to boil.

    Now, well would it have been for him who had first spoken had he left
    Robin Hood alone; but his anger was hot, both because the youth had
    gotten the better of him and because of the deep draughts of ale that
    he had been quaffing. So, of a sudden, without any warning, he sprang to
    his feet, and seized upon his bow and fitted it to a shaft. "Ay," cried
    he, "and I'll hurry thee anon." And he sent the arrow whistling after
    Robin.

    It was well for Robin Hood that that same forester's head was spinning
    with ale, or else he would never have taken another step. As it was, the
    arrow whistled within three inches of his head. Then he turned around
    and quickly drew his own bow, and sent an arrow back in return.

    "Ye said I was no archer," cried he aloud, "but say so now again!"

    The shaft flew straight; the archer fell forward with a cry, and lay on
    his face upon the ground, his arrows rattling about him from out of his
    quiver, the gray goose shaft wet with his; heart's blood. Then, before
    the others could gather their wits about them, Robin Hood was gone into
    the depths of the greenwood. Some started after him, but not with much
    heart, for each feared to suffer the death of his fellow; so presently
    they all came and lifted the dead man up and bore him away to Nottingham
    Town.

    Meanwhile Robin Hood ran through the greenwood. Gone was all the joy and
    brightness from everything, for his heart was sick within him, and it
    was borne in upon his soul that he had slain a man.

    "Alas!" cried he, "thou hast found me an archer that will make thy wife
    to wring! I would that thou hadst ne'er said one word to me, or that
    I had never passed thy way, or e'en that my right forefinger had been
    stricken off ere that this had happened! In haste I smote, but grieve I
    sore at leisure!" And then, even in his trouble, he remembered the old
    saw that "What is done is done; and the egg cracked cannot be cured."

    And so he came to dwell in the greenwood that was to be his home for
    many a year to come, never again to see the happy days with the lads and
    lasses of sweet Locksley Town; for he was outlawed, not only because he
    had killed a man, but also because he had poached upon the King's deer,
    and two hundred pounds were set upon his head, as a reward for whoever
    would bring him to the court of the King.

    Now the Sheriff of Nottingham swore that he himself would bring this
    knave Robin Hood to justice, and for two reasons: first, because he
    wanted the two hundred pounds, and next, because the forester that Robin
    Hood had killed was of kin to him.

    But Robin Hood lay hidden in Sherwood Forest for one year, and in that
    time there gathered around him many others like himself, cast out from
    other folk for this cause and for that. Some had shot deer in hungry
    wintertime, when they could get no other food, and had been seen in the
    act by the foresters, but had escaped, thus saving their ears; some had
    been turned out of their inheritance, that their farms might be added to
    the King's lands in Sherwood Forest; some had been despoiled by a great
    baron or a rich abbot or a powerful esquire - all, for one cause or
    another, had come to Sherwood to escape wrong and oppression.

    So, in all that year, fivescore or more good stout yeomen gathered about
    Robin Hood, and chose him to be their leader and chief. Then they vowed
    that even as they themselves had been despoiled they would despoil their
    oppressors, whether baron, abbot, knight, or squire, and that from each
    they would take that which had been wrung from the poor by unjust taxes,
    or land rents, or in wrongful fines. But to the poor folk they would
    give a helping hand in need and trouble, and would return to them that
    which had been unjustly taken from them. Besides this, they swore never
    to harm a child nor to wrong a woman, be she maid, wife, or widow; so
    that, after a while, when the people began to find that no harm was
    meant to them, but that money or food came in time of want to many a
    poor family, they came to praise Robin and his merry men, and to tell
    many tales of him and of his doings in Sherwood Forest, for they felt
    him to be one of themselves.

    Up rose Robin Hood one merry morn when all the birds were singing
    blithely among the leaves, and up rose all his merry men, each fellow
    washing his head and hands in the cold brown brook that leaped laughing
    from stone to stone. Then said Robin, "For fourteen days have we seen no
    sport, so now I will go abroad to seek adventures forthwith. But tarry
    ye, my merry men all, here in the greenwood; only see that ye mind well
    my call. Three blasts upon the bugle horn I will blow in my hour of
    need; then come quickly, for I shall want your aid."

    So saying, he strode away through the leafy forest glades until he
    had come to the verge of Sherwood. There he wandered for a long time,
    through highway and byway, through dingly dell and forest skirts. Now he
    met a fair buxom lass in a shady lane, and each gave the other a merry
    word and passed their way; now he saw a fair lady upon an ambling pad,
    to whom he doffed his cap, and who bowed sedately in return to the
    fair youth; now he saw a fat monk on a pannier-laden ass; now a gallant
    knight, with spear and shield and armor that flashed brightly in the
    sunlight; now a page clad in crimson; and now a stout burgher from good
    Nottingham Town, pacing along with serious footsteps; all these sights
    he saw, but adventure found he none. At last he took a road by the
    forest skirts, a bypath that dipped toward a broad, pebbly stream
    spanned by a narrow bridge made of a log of wood. As he drew nigh this
    bridge he saw a tall stranger coming from the other side. Thereupon
    Robin quickened his pace, as did the stranger likewise, each thinking to
    cross first.

    "Now stand thou back," quoth Robin, "and let the better man cross
    first."

    "Nay," answered the stranger, "then stand back shine own self, for the
    better man, I wet, am I."

    "That will we presently see," quoth Robin, "and meanwhile stand thou
    where thou art, or else, by the bright brow of Saint AElfrida, I will
    show thee right good Nottingham play with a clothyard shaft betwixt thy
    ribs."

    "Now," quoth the stranger, "I will tan thy hide till it be as many
    colors as a beggar's cloak, if thou darest so much as touch a string of
    that same bow that thou holdest in thy hands."

    "Thou pratest like an ass," said Robin, "for I could send this shaft
    clean through thy proud heart before a curtal friar could say grace over
    a roast goose at Michaelmastide."

    "And thou pratest like a coward," answered the stranger, "for thou
    standest there with a good yew bow to shoot at my heart, while I have
    nought in my hand but a plain blackthorn staff wherewith to meet thee."

    "Now," quoth Robin, "by the faith of my heart, never have I had a
    coward's name in all my life before. I will lay by my trusty bow and
    eke my arrows, and if thou darest abide my coming, I will go and cut a
    cudgel to test thy manhood withal."

    "Ay, marry, that will I abide thy coming, and joyously, too," quoth the
    stranger; whereupon he leaned sturdily upon his staff to await Robin.

    Then Robin Hood stepped quickly to the coverside and cut a good staff of
    ground oak, straight, without new, and six feet in length, and came back
    trimming away the tender stems from it, while the stranger waited for
    him, leaning upon his staff, and whistling as he gazed round about.
    Robin observed him furtively as he trimmed his staff, measuring him from
    top to toe from out the corner of his eye, and thought that he had never
    seen a lustier or a stouter man. Tall was Robin, but taller was the
    stranger by a head and a neck, for he was seven feet in height. Broad
    was Robin across the shoulders, but broader was the stranger by twice
    the breadth of a palm, while he measured at least an ell around the
    waist.

    "Nevertheless," said Robin to himself, "I will baste thy hide right
    merrily, my good fellow;" then, aloud, "Lo, here is my good staff,
    lusty and tough. Now wait my coming, an thou darest, and meet me an thou
    fearest not. Then we will fight until one or the other of us tumble into
    the stream by dint of blows."

    "Marry, that meeteth my whole heart!" cried the stranger, twirling his
    staff above his head, betwixt his fingers and thumb, until it whistled
    again.

    Never did the Knights of Arthur's Round Table meet in a stouter fight
    than did these two. In a moment Robin stepped quickly upon the bridge
    where the stranger stood; first he made a feint, and then delivered
    a blow at the stranger's head that, had it met its mark, would have
    tumbled him speedily into the water. But the stranger turned the blow
    right deftly and in return gave one as stout, which Robin also turned as
    the stranger had done. So they stood, each in his place, neither moving
    a finger's-breadth back, for one good hour, and many blows were given
    and received by each in that time, till here and there were sore bones
    and bumps, yet neither thought of crying "Enough," nor seemed likely to
    fall from off the bridge. Now and then they stopped to rest, and each
    thought that he never had seen in all his life before such a hand at
    quarterstaff. At last Robin gave the stranger a blow upon the ribs that
    made his jacket smoke like a damp straw thatch in the sun. So shrewd was
    the stroke that the stranger came within a hair's-breadth of falling off
    the bridge, but he regained himself right quickly and, by a dexterous
    blow, gave Robin a crack on the crown that caused the blood to flow.
    Then Robin grew mad with anger and smote with all his might at the
    other. But the stranger warded the blow and once again thwacked Robin,
    and this time so fairly that he fell heels over head into the water, as
    the queen pin falls in a game of bowls.

    "And where art thou now, my good lad?" shouted the stranger, roaring
    with laughter.

    "Oh, in the flood and floating adown with the tide," cried Robin, nor
    could he forbear laughing himself at his sorry plight. Then, gaining his
    feet, he waded to the bank, the little fish speeding hither and thither,
    all frightened at his splashing.

    "Give me thy hand," cried he, when he had reached the bank. "I must
    needs own thou art a brave and a sturdy soul and, withal, a good stout
    stroke with the cudgels. By this and by that, my head hummeth like to a
    hive of bees on a hot June day."

    Then he clapped his horn to his lips and winded a blast that went
    echoing sweetly down the forest paths. "Ay, marry," quoth he again,
    "thou art a tall lad, and eke a brave one, for ne'er, I bow, is there a
    man betwixt here and Canterbury Town could do the like to me that thou
    hast done."

    "And thou," quoth the stranger, laughing, "takest thy cudgeling like a
    brave heart and a stout yeoman."

    But now the distant twigs and branches rustled with the coming of men,
    and suddenly a score or two of good stout yeomen, all clad in Lincoln
    green, burst from out the covert, with merry Will Stutely at their head.

    "Good master," cried Will, "how is this? Truly thou art all wet from
    head to foot, and that to the very skin."

    "Why, marry," answered jolly Robin, "yon stout fellow hath tumbled me
    neck and crop into the water and hath given me a drubbing beside."

    "Then shall he not go without a ducking and eke a drubbing himself!"
    cried Will Stutely. "Have at him, lads!"

    Then Will and a score of yeomen leaped upon the stranger, but though
    they sprang quickly they found him ready and felt him strike right and
    left with his stout staff, so that, though he went down with press of
    numbers, some of them rubbed cracked crowns before he was overcome.

    "Nay, forbear!" cried Robin, laughing until his sore sides ached again.
    "He is a right good man and true, and no harm shall befall him. Now
    hark ye, good youth, wilt thou stay with me and be one of my band? Three
    suits of Lincoln green shalt thou have each year, beside forty marks in
    fee, and share with us whatsoever good shall befall us. Thou shalt eat
    sweet venison and quaff the stoutest ale, and mine own good right-hand
    man shalt thou be, for never did I see such a cudgel player in all my
    life before. Speak! Wilt thou be one of my good merry men?"

    "That know I not," quoth the stranger surlily, for he was angry at being
    so tumbled about. "If ye handle yew bow and apple shaft no better than
    ye do oaken cudgel, I wot ye are not fit to be called yeomen in my
    country; but if there be any man here that can shoot a better shaft than
    I, then will I bethink me of joining with you."

    "Now by my faith," said Robin, "thou art a right saucy varlet, sirrah;
    yet I will stoop to thee as I never stooped to man before. Good Stutely,
    cut thou a fair white piece of bark four fingers in breadth, and set it
    fourscore yards distant on yonder oak. Now, stranger, hit that fairly
    with a gray goose shaft and call thyself an archer."

    "Ay, marry, that will I," answered he. "Give me a good stout bow and a
    fair broad arrow, and if I hit it not, strip me and beat me blue with
    bowstrings."

    Then he chose the stoutest bow among them all, next to Robin's own, and
    a straight gray goose shaft, well-feathered and smooth, and stepping
    to the mark - while all the band, sitting or lying upon the greensward,
    watched to see him shoot - he drew the arrow to his cheek and loosed the
    shaft right deftly, sending it so straight down the path that it clove
    the mark in the very center. "Aha!" cried he, "mend thou that if thou
    canst;" while even the yeomen clapped their hands at so fair a shot.

    "That is a keen shot indeed," quoth Robin. "Mend it I cannot, but mar it
    I may, perhaps."

    Then taking up his own good stout bow and nocking an arrow with care, he
    shot with his very greatest skill. Straight flew the arrow, and so
    true that it lit fairly upon the stranger's shaft and split it into
    splinters. Then all the yeomen leaped to their feet and shouted for joy
    that their master had shot so well.

    "Now by the lusty yew bow of good Saint Withold," cried the stranger,
    "that is a shot indeed, and never saw I the like in all my life before!
    Now truly will I be thy man henceforth and for aye. Good Adam Bell(1)
    was a fair shot, but never shot he so!"


         (1) Adam Bell, Clym o' the Clough, and William of Cloudesly
         were three noted north-country bowmen whose names have been
         celebrated in many ballads of the olden time.


    "Then have I gained a right good man this day," quoth jolly Robin. "What
    name goest thou by, good fellow?"

    "Men call me John Little whence I came," answered the stranger.

    Then Will Stutely, who loved a good jest, spoke up. "Nay, fair little
    stranger," said he, "I like not thy name and fain would I have it
    otherwise. Little art thou indeed, and small of bone and sinew,
    therefore shalt thou be christened Little John, and I will be thy
    godfather."

    Then Robin Hood and all his band laughed aloud until the stranger began
    to grow angry.

    "An thou make a jest of me," quoth he to Will Stutely, "thou wilt have
    sore bones and little pay, and that in short season."

    "Nay, good friend," said Robin Hood, "bottle thine anger, for the name
    fitteth thee well. Little John shall thou be called henceforth, and
    Little John shall it be. So come, my merry men, we will prepare a
    christening feast for this fair infant."

    So turning their backs upon the stream, they plunged into the forest
    once more, through which they traced their steps till they reached the
    spot where they dwelled in the depths of the woodland. There had they
    built huts of bark and branches of trees, and made couches of sweet
    rushes spread over with skins of fallow deer. Here stood a great oak
    tree with branches spreading broadly around, beneath which was a seat of
    green moss where Robin Hood was wont to sit at feast and at merrymaking
    with his stout men about him. Here they found the rest of the band, some
    of whom had come in with a brace of fat does. Then they all built great
    fires and after a time roasted the does and broached a barrel of humming
    ale. Then when the feast was ready they all sat down, but Robin placed
    Little John at his right hand, for he was henceforth to be the second in
    the band.

    Then when the feast was done Will Stutely spoke up. "It is now time, I
    ween, to christen our bonny babe, is it not so, merry boys?" And "Aye!
    Aye!" cried all, laughing till the woods echoed with their mirth.

    "Then seven sponsors shall we have," quoth Will Stutely, and hunting
    among all the band, he chose the seven stoutest men of them all.

    "Now by Saint Dunstan," cried Little John, springing to his feet, "more
    than one of you shall rue it an you lay finger upon me."

    But without a word they all ran upon him at once, seizing him by his
    legs and arms and holding him tightly in spite of his struggles, and
    they bore him forth while all stood around to see the sport. Then one
    came forward who had been chosen to play the priest because he had a
    bald crown, and in his hand he carried a brimming pot of ale. "Now, who
    bringeth this babe?" asked he right soberly.

    "That do I," answered Will Stutely.

    "And what name callest thou him?"

    "Little John call I him."

    "Now Little John," quoth the mock priest, "thou hast not lived
    heretofore, but only got thee along through the world, but henceforth
    thou wilt live indeed. When thou livedst not thou wast called John
    Little, but now that thou dost live indeed, Little John shalt thou be
    called, so christen I thee." And at these last words he emptied the pot
    of ale upon Little John's head.

    Then all shouted with laughter as they saw the good brown ale stream
    over Little John's beard and trickle from his nose and chin, while his
    eyes blinked with the smart of it. At first he was of a mind to be angry
    but found he could not, because the others were so merry; so he, too,
    laughed with the rest. Then Robin took this sweet, pretty babe, clothed
    him all anew from top to toe in Lincoln green, and gave him a good stout
    bow, and so made him a member of the merry band.

    And thus it was that Robin Hood became outlawed; thus a band of merry
    companions gathered about him, and thus he gained his right-hand man,
    Little John; and so the prologue ends. And now I will tell how the
    Sheriff of Nottingham three times sought to take Robin Hood, and how he
    failed each time.




    Robin Hood and the Tinker

    Now it was told before how two hundred pounds were set upon Robin Hood's
    head, and how the Sheriff of Nottingham swore that he himself would
    seize Robin, both because he would fain have the two hundred pounds and
    because the slain man was a kinsman of his own. Now the Sheriff did not
    yet know what a force Robin had about him in Sherwood, but thought that
    he might serve a warrant for his arrest as he could upon any other man
    that had broken the laws; therefore he offered fourscore golden angels
    to anyone who would serve this warrant. But men of Nottingham Town knew
    more of Robin Hood and his doings than the Sheriff did, and many laughed
    to think of serving a warrant upon the bold outlaw, knowing well that
    all they would get for such service would be cracked crowns; so that no
    one came forward to take the matter in hand. Thus a fortnight passed, in
    which time none came forward to do the Sheriff's business. Then said he,
    "A right good reward have I offered to whosoever would serve my warrant
    upon Robin Hood, and I marvel that no one has come to undertake the
    task."

    Then one of his men who was near him said, "Good master, thou wottest
    not the force that Robin Hood has about him and how little he cares for
    warrant of king or sheriff. Truly, no one likes to go on this service,
    for fear of cracked crowns and broken bones."

    "Then I hold all Nottingham men to be cowards," said the Sheriff. "And
    let me see the man in all Nottinghamshire that dare disobey the warrant
    of our sovereign lord King Harry, for, by the shrine of Saint Edmund,
    I will hang him forty cubits high! But if no man in Nottingham dare
    win fourscore angels, I will send elsewhere, for there should be men of
    mettle somewhere in this land."

    Then he called up a messenger in whom he placed great trust, and bade
    him saddle his horse and make ready to go to Lincoln Town to see whether
    he could find anyone there that would do his bidding and win the reward.
    So that same morning the messenger started forth upon his errand.

    Bright shone the sun upon the dusty highway that led from Nottingham
    to Lincoln, stretching away all white over hill and dale. Dusty was the
    highway and dusty the throat of the messenger, so that his heart was
    glad when he saw before him the Sign of the Blue Boar Inn, when somewhat
    more than half his journey was done. The inn looked fair to his eyes,
    and the shade of the oak trees that stood around it seemed cool and
    pleasant, so he alighted from his horse to rest himself for a time,
    calling for a pot of ale to refresh his thirsty throat.

    There he saw a party of right jovial fellows seated beneath the
    spreading oak that shaded the greensward in front of the door. There
    was a tinker, two barefoot friars, and a party of six of the King's
    foresters all clad in Lincoln green, and all of them were quaffing
    humming ale and singing merry ballads of the good old times. Loud
    laughed the foresters, as jests were bandied about between the singing,
    and louder laughed the friars, for they were lusty men with beards
    that curled like the wool of black rams; but loudest of all laughed the
    Tinker, and he sang more sweetly than any of the rest. His bag and his
    hammer hung upon a twig of the oak tree, and near by leaned his good
    stout cudgel, as thick as his wrist and knotted at the end.

    "Come," cried one of the foresters to the tired messenger, "come join us
    for this shot. Ho, landlord! Bring a fresh pot of ale for each man."

    The messenger was glad enough to sit down along with the others who were
    there, for his limbs were weary and the ale was good.

    "Now what news bearest thou so fast?" quoth one, "and whither ridest
    thou today?"

    The messenger was a chatty soul and loved a bit of gossip dearly;
    besides, the pot of ale warmed his heart; so that, settling himself in
    an easy corner of the inn bench, while the host leaned upon the doorway
    and the hostess stood with her hands beneath her apron, he unfolded his
    budget of news with great comfort. He told all from the very first:
    how Robin Hood had slain the forester, and how he had hidden in the
    greenwood to escape the law; how that he lived therein, all against the
    law, God wot, slaying His Majesty's deer and levying toll on fat abbot,
    knight, and esquire, so that none dare travel even on broad Watling
    Street or the Fosse Way for fear of him; how that the Sheriff had a mind
    to serve the King's warrant upon this same rogue, though little would he
    mind warrant of either king or sheriff, for he was far from being a
    law-abiding man. Then he told how none could be found in all Nottingham
    Town to serve this warrant, for fear of cracked pates and broken bones,
    and how that he, the messenger, was now upon his way to Lincoln Town to
    find of what mettle the Lincoln men might be.

    "Now come I, forsooth, from good Banbury Town," said the jolly Tinker,
    "and no one nigh Nottingham - nor Sherwood either, an that be the
    mark - can hold cudgel with my grip. Why, lads, did I not meet that mad
    wag Simon of Ely, even at the famous fair at Hertford Town, and beat him
    in the ring at that place before Sir Robert of Leslie and his lady? This
    same Robin Hood, of whom, I wot, I never heard before, is a right merry
    blade, but gin he be strong, am not I stronger? And gin he be sly, am
    not I slyer? Now by the bright eyes of Nan o' the Mill, and by mine own
    name and that's Wat o' the Crabstaff, and by mine own mother's son,
    and that's myself, will I, even I, Wat o' the Crabstaff, meet this same
    sturdy rogue, and gin he mind not the seal of our glorious sovereign
    King Harry, and the warrant of the good Sheriff of Nottinghamshire,
    I will so bruise, beat, and bemaul his pate that he shall never move
    finger or toe again! Hear ye that, bully boys?"

    "Now art thou the man for my farthing," cried the messenger. "And back
    thou goest with me to Nottingham Town."

    "Nay," quoth the Tinker, shaking his head slowly from side to side. "Go
    I with no man gin it be not with mine own free will."

    "Nay, nay," said the messenger, "no man is there in Nottinghamshire
    could make thee go against thy will, thou brave fellow."

    "Ay, that be I brave," said the Tinker.

    "Ay, marry," said the messenger, "thou art a brave lad; but our good
    Sheriff hath offered fourscore angels of bright gold to whosoever shall
    serve the warrant upon Robin Hood; though little good will it do."

    "Then I will go with thee, lad. Do but wait till I get my bag and
    hammer, and my cudgel. Ay, let' me but meet this same Robin Hood, and
    let me see whether he will not mind the King's warrant." So, after
    having paid their score, the messenger, with the Tinker striding beside
    his nag, started back to Nottingham again.

    One bright morning soon after this time, Robin Hood started off to
    Nottingham Town to find what was a-doing there, walking merrily along
    the roadside where the grass was sweet with daisies, his eyes wandering
    and his thoughts also. His bugle horn hung at his hip and his bow and
    arrows at his back, while in his hand he bore a good stout oaken staff,
    which he twirled with his fingers as he strolled along.

    As thus he walked down a shady lane he saw a tinker coming, trolling a
    merry song as he drew nigh. On his back hung his bag and his hammer, and
    in his hand he carried a right stout crabstaff full six feet long, and
    thus sang he:

         "_In peascod time, when hound to horn
         Gives ear till buck be killed,
         And little lads with pipes of corn
         Sit keeping beasts afield_ - "

    "Halloa, good friend!" cried Robin.

    "I WENT TO GATHER STRAWBERRIES - "

    "Halloa!" cried Robin again.

    "BY WOODS AND GROVES FULL FAIR - "

    "Halloa! Art thou deaf, man? Good friend, say I!"

    "And who art thou dost so boldly check a fair song?" quoth the Tinker,
    stopping in his singing. "Halloa, shine own self, whether thou be good
    friend or no. But let me tell thee, thou stout fellow, gin thou be a
    good friend it were well for us both; but gin thou be no good friend it
    were ill for thee."

    "And whence comest thou, my lusty blade?" quoth Robin.

    "I come from Banbury," answered the Tinker.

    "Alas!" quoth Robin, "I hear there is sad news this merry morn."

    "Ha! Is it indeed so?" cried the Tinker eagerly. "Prythee tell it
    speedily, for I am a tinker by trade, as thou seest, and as I am in my
    trade I am greedy for news, even as a priest is greedy for farthings."

    "Well then," quoth Robin, "list thou and I will tell, but bear thyself
    up bravely, for the news is sad, I wot. Thus it is: I hear that two
    tinkers are in the stocks for drinking ale and beer!"

    "Now a murrain seize thee and thy news, thou scurvy dog," quoth the
    Tinker, "for thou speakest but ill of good men. But sad news it is
    indeed, gin there be two stout fellows in the stocks."

    "Nay," said Robin, "thou hast missed the mark and dost but weep for the
    wrong sow. The sadness of the news lieth in that there be but two in the
    stocks, for the others do roam the country at large."

    "Now by the pewter platter of Saint Dunstan," cried the Tinker, "I have
    a good part of a mind to baste thy hide for thine ill jest. But gin men
    be put in the stocks for drinking ale and beer, I trow thou wouldst not
    lose thy part."

    Loud laughed Robin and cried, "Now well taken, Tinker, well taken! Why,
    thy wits are like beer, and do froth up most when they grow sour! But
    right art thou, man, for I love ale and beer right well. Therefore come
    straightway with me hard by to the Sign of the Blue Boar, and if thou
    drinkest as thou appearest - and I wot thou wilt not belie thy looks - I
    will drench thy throat with as good homebrewed as ever was tapped in all
    broad Nottinghamshire."

    "Now by my faith," said the Tinker, "thou art a right good fellow in
    spite of thy scurvy jests. I love thee, my sweet chuck, and gin I go not
    with thee to that same Blue Boar thou mayst call me a heathen."

    "Tell me thy news, good friend, I prythee," quoth Robin as they trudged
    along together, "for tinkers, I ween, are all as full of news as an egg
    of meat."

    "Now I love thee as my brother, my bully blade," said the Tinker, "else
    I would not tell thee my news; for sly am I, man, and I have in hand a
    grave undertaking that doth call for all my wits, for I come to seek
    a bold outlaw that men, hereabouts, call Robin Hood. Within my pouch I
    have a warrant, all fairly written out on parchment, forsooth, with a
    great red seal for to make it lawful. Could I but meet this same Robin
    Hood I would serve it upon his dainty body, and if he minded it not
    I would beat him till every one of his ribs would cry Amen. But thou
    livest hereabouts, mayhap thou knowest Robin Hood thyself, good fellow."

    "Ay, marry, that I do somewhat," quoth Robin, "and I have seen him this
    very morn. But, Tinker, men say that he is but a sad, sly thief. Thou
    hadst better watch thy warrant, man, or else he may steal it out of thy
    very pouch."

    "Let him but try!" cried the Tinker. "Sly may he be, but sly am I, too.
    I would I had him here now, man to man!" And he made his heavy cudgel to
    spin again. "But what manner of man is he, lad?

    "Much like myself," said Robin, laughing, "and in height and build and
    age nigh the same; and he hath blue eyes, too."

    "Nay," quoth the Tinker, "thou art but a green youth. I thought him to
    be a great bearded man. Nottingham men feared him so."

    "Truly, he is not so old nor so stout as thou art," said Robin. "But men
    do call him a right deft hand at quarterstaff."

    "That may be," said the Tinker right sturdily, "but I am more deft than
    he, for did I not overcome Simon of Ely in a fair bout in the ring at
    Hertford Town? But if thou knowest him, my jolly blade, wilt thou go
    with me and bring me to him? Fourscore bright angels hath the Sheriff
    promised me if I serve the warrant upon the knave's body, and ten of
    them will I give to thee if thou showest me him."

    "Ay, that will I," quoth Robin, "but show me thy warrant, man, until I
    see whether it be good or no."

    "That will I not do, even to mine own brother," answered the Tinker. "No
    man shall see my warrant till I serve it upon yon fellow's own body."

    "So be it," quoth Robin. "And thou show it not to me I know not to whom
    thou wilt show it. But here we are at the Sign of the Blue Boar, so let
    us in and taste his brown October."

    No sweeter inn could be found in all Nottinghamshire than that of the
    Blue Boar. None had such lovely trees standing around, or was so covered
    with trailing clematis and sweet woodbine; none had such good beer and
    such humming ale; nor, in wintertime, when the north wind howled and
    snow drifted around the hedges, was there to be found, elsewhere, such
    a roaring fire as blazed upon the hearth of the Blue Boar. At such times
    might be found a goodly company of yeomen or country folk seated around
    the blazing hearth, bandying merry jests, while roasted crabs(2) bobbed
    in bowls of ale upon the hearthstone. Well known was the inn to Robin
    Hood and his band, for there had he and such merry companions as Little
    John or Will Stutely or young David of Doncaster often gathered when all
    the forest was filled with snow. As for mine host, he knew how to keep
    a still tongue in his head, and to swallow his words before they passed
    his teeth, for he knew very well which side of his bread was spread with
    butter, for Robin and his band were the best of customers and paid their
    scores without having them chalked up behind the door. So now, when
    Robin Hood and the Tinker came thereto and called aloud for two great
    pots of ale, none would have known from look or speech that the host had
    ever set eyes upon the outlaw before.

         (2) Small sour apples.

    "Bide thou here," quoth Robin to the Tinker, "while I go and see that
    mine host draweth ale from the right butt, for he hath good October, I
    know, and that brewed by Withold of Tamworth." So saying, he went within
    and whispered to the host to add a measure of Flemish strong waters to
    the good English ale; which the latter did and brought it to them.

    "By Our Lady," said the Tinker, after a long draught of the ale, "yon
    same Withold of Tamworth - a right good Saxon name, too, I would have
    thee know - breweth the most humming ale that e'er passed the lips of Wat
    o' the Crabstaff."

    "Drink, man, drink," cried Robin, only wetting his own lips meanwhile.
    "Ho, landlord! Bring my friend another pot of the same. And now for a
    song, my jolly blade."

    "Ay, that will I give thee a song, my lovely fellow," quoth the Tinker,
    "for I never tasted such ale in all my days before. By Our Lady, it
    doth make my head hum even now! Hey, Dame Hostess, come listen, an thou
    wouldst hear a song, and thou too, thou bonny lass, for never sing I so
    well as when bright eyes do look upon me the while."

    Then he sang an ancient ballad of the time of good King Arthur, called
    "The Marriage of Sir Gawaine," which you may some time read yourself, in
    stout English of early times; and as he sang, all listened to that noble
    tale of noble knight and his sacrifice to his king. But long before the
    Tinker came to the last verse his tongue began to trip and his head to
    spin, because of the strong waters mixed with the ale. First his tongue
    tripped, then it grew thick of sound; then his head wagged from side to
    side, until at last he fell asleep as though he never would waken again.

    Then Robin Hood laughed aloud and quickly took the warrant from out the
    Tinker's pouch with his deft fingers. "Sly art thou, Tinker," quoth he,
    "but not yet, I bow, art thou as sly as that same sly thief Robin Hood."

    Then he called the host to him and said, "Here, good man, are ten broad
    shillings for the entertainment thou hast given us this day. See that
    thou takest good care of thy fair guest there, and when he wakes thou
    mayst again charge him ten shillings also, and if he hath it not, thou
    mayst take his bag and hammer, and even his coat, in payment. Thus do
    I punish those that come into the greenwood to deal dole to me. As for
    thine own self, never knew I landlord yet that would not charge twice an
    he could."

    At this the host smiled slyly, as though saying to himself the rustic
    saw, "Teach a magpie to suck eggs."

    The Tinker slept until the afternoon drew to a close and the shadows
    grew long beside the woodland edge, then he awoke. First he looked up,
    then he looked down, then he looked east, then he looked west, for he
    was gathering his wits together, like barley straws blown apart by the
    wind. First he thought of his merry companion, but he was gone. Then he
    thought of his stout crabstaff, and that he had within his hand. Then of
    his warrant, and of the fourscore angels he was to gain for serving it
    upon Robin Hood. He thrust his hand into his pouch, but not a scrap nor
    a farthing was there. Then he sprang to his feet in a rage.

    "Ho, landlord!" cried he, "whither hath that knave gone that was with me
    but now?"

    "What knave meaneth Your Worship?" quoth the landlord, calling the
    Tinker Worship to soothe him, as a man would pour oil upon angry water.
    "I saw no knave with Your Worship, for I swear no man would dare call
    that man knave so nigh to Sherwood Forest. A right stout yeoman I saw
    with Your Worship, but I thought that Your Worship knew him, for few
    there be about here that pass him by and know him not."

    "Now, how should I, that ne'er have squealed in your sty, know all the
    swine therein? Who was he, then, an thou knowest him so well?"

    "Why, yon same is a right stout fellow whom men hereabouts do call Robin
    Hood, which same - "

    "Now, by'r Lady!" cried the Tinker hastily, and in a deep voice like an
    angry bull, "thou didst see me come into thine inn, I, a staunch, honest
    craftsman, and never told me who my company was, well knowing thine own
    self who he was. Now, I have a right round piece of a mind to crack thy
    knave's pate for thee!" Then he took up his cudgel and looked at the
    landlord as though he would smite him where he stood.

    "Nay," cried the host, throwing up his elbow, for he feared the blow,
    "how knew I that thou knewest him not?"

    "Well and truly thankful mayst thou be," quoth the Tinker, "that I be
    a patient man and so do spare thy bald crown, else wouldst thou ne'er
    cheat customer again. But as for this same knave Robin Hood, I go
    straightway to seek him, and if I do not score his knave's pate, cut
    my staff into fagots and call me woman." So saying, he gathered himself
    together to depart.

    "Nay," quoth the landlord, standing in front of him and holding out his
    arms like a gooseherd driving his flock, for money made him bold, "thou
    goest not till thou hast paid me my score."

    "But did not he pay thee?"

    "Not so much as one farthing; and ten good shillings' worth of ale have
    ye drunk this day. Nay, I say, thou goest not away without paying me,
    else shall our good Sheriff know of it."

    "But nought have I to pay thee with, good fellow," quoth the Tinker.

    "'Good fellow' not me," said the landlord. "Good fellow am I not when
    it cometh to lose ten shillings! Pay me that thou owest me in broad
    money, or else leave thy coat and bag and hammer; yet, I wot they
    are not worth ten shillings, and I shall lose thereby. Nay, an thou
    stirrest, I have a great dog within and I will loose him upon thee.
    Maken, open thou the door and let forth Brian if this fellow stirs one
    step."

    "Nay," quoth the Tinker - for, by roaming the country, he had learned
    what dogs were - "take thou what thou wilt have, and let me depart in
    peace, and may a murrain go with thee. But oh, landlord! An I catch yon
    scurvy varlet, I swear he shall pay full with usury for that he hath
    had!"

    So saying, he strode away toward the forest, talking to himself, while
    the landlord and his worthy dame and Maken stood looking after him, and
    laughed when he had fairly gone.

    "Robin and I stripped yon ass of his pack main neatly," quoth the
    landlord.

    Now it happened about this time that Robin Hood was going through the
    forest to Fosse Way, to see what was to be seen there, for the moon was
    full and the night gave promise of being bright. In his hand he carried
    his stout oaken staff, and at his side hung his bugle horn. As thus he
    walked up a forest path, whistling, down another path came the Tinker,
    muttering to himself and shaking his head like an angry bull; and so,
    at a sudden bend, they met sharply face to face. Each stood still for a
    time, and then Robin spoke:

    "Halloa, my sweet bird," said he, laughing merrily, "how likest thou
    thine ale? Wilt not sing to me another song?"

    The Tinker said nothing at first but stood looking at Robin with a grim
    face. "Now," quoth he at last, "I am right glad I have met thee, and if
    I do not rattle thy bones within thy hide this day, I give thee leave to
    put thy foot upon my neck."

    "With all my heart," cried merry Robin. "Rattle my bones, an thou
    canst." So saying, he gripped his staff and threw himself upon his
    guard. Then the Tinker spat upon his hands and, grasping his staff, came
    straight at the other. He struck two or three blows, but soon found that
    he had met his match, for Robin warded and parried all of them, and,
    before the Tinker thought, he gave him a rap upon the ribs in return. At
    this Robin laughed aloud, and the Tinker grew more angry than ever, and
    smote again with all his might and main. Again Robin warded two of the
    strokes, but at the third, his staff broke beneath the mighty blows of
    the Tinker. "Now, ill betide thee, traitor staff," cried Robin, as it
    fell from his hands; "a foul stick art thou to serve me thus in mine
    hour of need."

    "Now yield thee," quoth the Tinker, "for thou art my captive; and if
    thou do not, I will beat thy pate to a pudding."

    To this Robin Hood made no answer, but, clapping his horn to his lips,
    he blew three blasts, loud and clear.

    "Ay," quoth the Tinker, "blow thou mayest, but go thou must with me to
    Nottingham Town, for the Sheriff would fain see thee there. Now wilt
    thou yield thee, or shall I have to break thy pretty head?"

    "An I must drink sour ale, I must," quoth Robin, "but never have I
    yielded me to man before, and that without wound or mark upon my
    body. Nor, when I bethink me, will I yield now. Ho, my merry men! Come
    quickly!"

    Then from out the forest leaped Little John and six stout yeomen clad in
    Lincoln green.

    "How now, good master," cried Little John, "what need hast thou that
    thou dost wind thy horn so loudly?"

    "There stands a tinker," quoth Robin, "that would fain take me to
    Nottingham, there to hang upon the gallows tree."

    "Then shall he himself hang forthwith," cried Little John, and he and
    the others made at the Tinker, to seize him.

    "Nay, touch him not," said Robin, "for a right stout man is he. A metal
    man he is by trade, and a mettled man by nature; moreover, he doth sing
    a lovely ballad. Say, good fellow, wilt thou join my merry men all?
    Three suits of Lincoln green shalt thou have a year, besides forty marks
    in fee; thou shalt share all with us and lead a right merry life in
    the greenwood; for cares have we not, and misfortune cometh not upon
    us within the sweet shades of Sherwood, where we shoot the dun deer and
    feed upon venison and sweet oaten cakes, and curds and honey. Wilt thou
    come with me?"

    "Ay, marry, will I join with you all," quoth the Tinker, "for I love a
    merry life, and I love thee, good master, though thou didst thwack my
    ribs and cheat me into the bargain. Fain am I to own thou art both a
    stouter and a slyer man than I; so I will obey thee and be thine own
    true servant."

    So all turned their steps to the forest depths, where the Tinker was to
    live henceforth. For many a day he sang ballads to the band, until the
    famous Allan a Dale joined them, before whose sweet voice all others
    seemed as harsh as a raven's; but of him we will learn hereafter.




    The Shooting Match at Nottingham Town

    THEN THE SHERIFF was very wroth because of this failure to take jolly
    Robin, for it came to his ears, as ill news always does, that the people
    laughed at him and made a jest of his thinking to serve a warrant upon
    such a one as the bold outlaw. And a man hates nothing so much as
    being made a jest of; so he said: "Our gracious lord and sovereign King
    himself shall know of this, and how his laws are perverted and despised
    by this band of rebel outlaws. As for yon traitor Tinker, him will
    I hang, if I catch him, upon the very highest gallows tree in all
    Nottinghamshire."

    Then he bade all his servants and retainers to make ready to go to
    London Town, to see and speak with the King.

    At this there was bustling at the Sheriff's castle, and men ran hither
    and thither upon this business and upon that, while the forge fires of
    Nottingham glowed red far into the night like twinkling stars, for
    all the smiths of the town were busy making or mending armor for the
    Sheriff's troop of escort. For two days this labor lasted, then, on
    the third, all was ready for the journey. So forth they started in the
    bright sunlight, from Nottingham Town to Fosse Way and thence to Watling
    Street; and so they journeyed for two days, until they saw at last the
    spires and towers of great London Town; and many folks stopped, as
    they journeyed along, and gazed at the show they made riding along the
    highways with their flashing armor and gay plumes and trappings.

    In London King Henry and his fair Queen Eleanor held their court, gay
    with ladies in silks and satins and velvets and cloth of gold, and also
    brave knights and gallant courtiers.

    Thither came the Sheriff and was shown into the King's presence.

    "A boon, a boon," quoth he, as he knelt upon the ground.

    "Now what wouldst thou have?" said the King. "Let us hear what may be
    thy desires."

    "O good my Lord and Sovereign," spake the Sheriff, "in Sherwood Forest
    in our own good shire of Nottingham, liveth a bold outlaw whose name is
    Robin Hood."

    "In good sooth," said the King, "his doings have reached even our own
    royal ears. He is a saucy, rebellious varlet, yet, I am fain to own, a
    right merry soul withal."

    "But hearken, O my most gracious Sovereign," said the Sheriff. "I sent
    a warrant to him with thine own royal seal attached, by a right lusty
    knave, but he beat the messenger and stole the warrant. And he killeth
    thy deer and robbeth thine own liege subjects even upon the great
    highways."

    "Why, how now," quoth the King wrathfully. "What wouldst thou have
    me do? Comest thou not to me with a great array of men-at-arms and
    retainers, and yet art not able to take a single band of lusty knaves
    without armor on breast, in thine own county! What wouldst thou have
    me do? Art thou not my Sheriff? Are not my laws in force in
    Nottinghamshire? Canst thou not take thine own course against those that
    break the laws or do any injury to thee or thine? Go, get thee gone, and
    think well; devise some plan of thine own, but trouble me no further.
    But look well to it, Master Sheriff, for I will have my laws obeyed by
    all men within my kingdom, and if thou art not able to enforce them thou
    art no sheriff for me. So look well to thyself, I say, or ill may befall
    thee as well as all the thieving knaves in Nottinghamshire. When the
    flood cometh it sweepeth away grain as well as chaff."

    Then the Sheriff turned away with a sore and troubled heart, and sadly
    he rued his fine show of retainers, for he saw that the King was angry
    because he had so many men about him and yet could not enforce the
    laws. So, as they all rode slowly back to Nottingham, the Sheriff was
    thoughtful and full of care. Not a word did he speak to anyone, and no
    one of his men spoke to him, but all the time he was busy devising some
    plan to take Robin Hood.

    "Aha!" cried he suddenly, smiting his hand upon his thigh "I have it
    now! Ride on, my merry men all, and let us get back to Nottingham Town
    as speedily as we may. And mark well my words: before a fortnight
    is passed, that evil knave Robin Hood will be safely clapped into
    Nottingham gaol."

    But what was the Sheriff's plan?

    As a usurer takes each one of a bag of silver angels, feeling each coin
    to find whether it be clipped or not, so the Sheriff, as all rode slowly
    and sadly back toward Nottingham, took up thought after thought in turn,
    feeling around the edges of each but finding in every one some flaw.
    At last he thought of the daring soul of jolly Robin and how, as he the
    Sheriff knew, he often came even within the walls of Nottingham.

    "Now," thought the Sheriff, "could I but persuade Robin nigh to
    Nottingham Town so that I could find him, I warrant I would lay hands
    upon him so stoutly that he would never get away again." Then of a
    sudden it came to him like a flash that were he to proclaim a great
    shooting match and offer some grand prize, Robin Hood might be
    overpersuaded by his spirit to come to the butts; and it was this
    thought which caused him to cry "Aha!" and smite his palm upon his
    thigh.

    So, as soon as he had returned safely to Nottingham, he sent messengers
    north and south, and east and west, to proclaim through town, hamlet,
    and countryside, this grand shooting match, and everyone was bidden that
    could draw a longbow, and the prize was to be an arrow of pure beaten
    gold.

    When Robin Hood first heard the news of this he was in Lincoln Town, and
    hastening back to Sherwood Forest he soon called all his merry men about
    him and spoke to them thus:

    "Now hearken, my merry men all, to the news that I have brought from
    Lincoln Town today. Our friend the Sheriff of Nottingham hath proclaimed
    a shooting match, and hath sent messengers to tell of it through all the
    countryside, and the prize is to be a bright golden arrow. Now I fain
    would have one of us win it, both because of the fairness of the prize
    and because our sweet friend the Sheriff hath offered it. So we will
    take our bows and shafts and go there to shoot, for I know right well
    that merriment will be a-going. What say ye, lads?"

    Then young David of Doncaster spoke up and said, "Now listen, I pray
    thee, good master, unto what I say. I have come straight from our friend
    Eadom o' the Blue Boar, and there I heard the full news of this same
    match. But, master, I know from him, and he got it from the Sheriff's
    man Ralph o' the Scar, that this same knavish Sheriff hath but laid a
    trap for thee in this shooting match and wishes nothing so much as to
    see thee there. So go not, good master, for I know right well he doth
    seek to beguile thee, but stay within the greenwood lest we all meet
    dole and woe."

    "Now," quoth Robin, "thou art a wise lad and keepest thine ears open and
    thy mouth shut, as becometh a wise and crafty woodsman. But shall we let
    it be said that the Sheriff of Nottingham did cow bold Robin Hood and
    sevenscore as fair archers as are in all merry England? Nay, good David,
    what thou tellest me maketh me to desire the prize even more than I else
    should do. But what sayeth our good gossip Swanthold? Is it not 'A hasty
    man burneth his mouth, and the fool that keepeth his eyes shut falleth
    into the pit'? Thus he says, truly, therefore we must meet guile with
    guile. Now some of you clothe yourselves as curtal friars, and some as
    rustic peasants, and some as tinkers, or as beggars, but see that each
    man taketh a good bow or broadsword, in case need should arise. As for
    myself, I will shoot for this same golden arrow, and should I win it, we
    will hang it to the branches of our good greenwood tree for the joy of
    all the band. How like you the plan, my merry men all?"

    Then "Good, good!" cried all the band right heartily.

    A fair sight was Nottingham Town on the day of the shooting match. All
    along upon the green meadow beneath the town wall stretched a row of
    benches, one above the other, which were for knight and lady, squire and
    dame, and rich burghers and their wives; for none but those of rank and
    quality were to sit there. At the end of the range, near the target, was
    a raised seat bedecked with ribbons and scarfs and garlands of flowers,
    for the Sheriff of Nottingham and his dame. The range was twoscore
    paces broad. At one end stood the target, at the other a tent of
    striped canvas, from the pole of which fluttered many-colored flags and
    streamers. In this booth were casks of ale, free to be broached by any
    of the archers who might wish to quench their thirst.

    Across the range from where the seats for the better folk were raised
    was a railing to keep the poorer people from crowding in front of the
    target. Already, while it was early, the benches were beginning to fill
    with people of quality, who kept constantly arriving in little carts or
    upon palfreys that curveted gaily to the merry tinkle of silver bells at
    bridle reins. With these came also the poorer folk, who sat or lay upon
    the green grass near the railing that kept them from off the range.
    In the great tent the archers were gathering by twos and threes; some
    talking loudly of the fair shots each man had made in his day; some
    looking well to their bows, drawing a string betwixt the fingers to see
    that there was no fray upon it, or inspecting arrows, shutting one eye
    and peering down a shaft to see that it was not warped, but straight and
    true, for neither bow nor shaft should fail at such a time and for such
    a prize. And never was such a company of yeomen as were gathered at
    Nottingham Town that day, for the very best archers of merry England
    had come to this shooting match. There was Gill o' the Red Cap, the
    Sheriff's own head archer, and Diccon Cruikshank of Lincoln Town, and
    Adam o' the Dell, a man of Tamworth, of threescore years and more, yet
    hale and lusty still, who in his time had shot in the famous match
    at Woodstock, and had there beaten that renowned archer, Clym o' the
    Clough. And many more famous men of the longbow were there, whose names
    have been handed down to us in goodly ballads of the olden time.

    But now all the benches were filled with guests, lord and lady, burgher
    and dame, when at last the Sheriff himself came with his lady, he riding
    with stately mien upon his milk-white horse and she upon her brown
    filly. Upon his head he wore a purple velvet cap, and purple velvet was
    his robe, all trimmed about with rich ermine; his jerkin and hose were
    of sea-green silk, and his shoes of black velvet, the pointed toes
    fastened to his garters with golden chains. A golden chain hung about
    his neck, and at his collar was a great carbuncle set in red gold. His
    lady was dressed in blue velvet, all trimmed with swan's down. So they
    made a gallant sight as they rode along side by side, and all the people
    shouted from where they crowded across the space from the gentlefolk;
    so the Sheriff and his lady came to their place, where men-at-arms, with
    hauberk and spear, stood about, waiting for them.

    Then when the Sheriff and his dame had sat down, he bade his herald
    wind upon his silver horn; who thereupon sounded three blasts that
    came echoing cheerily back from the gray walls of Nottingham. Then the
    archers stepped forth to their places, while all the folks shouted with
    a mighty voice, each man calling upon his favorite yeoman. "Red Cap!"
    cried some; "Cruikshank!" cried others; "Hey for William o' Leslie!"
    shouted others yet again; while ladies waved silken scarfs to urge each
    yeoman to do his best.

    Then the herald stood forth and loudly proclaimed the rules of the game
    as follows:

    "Shoot each man from yon mark, which is sevenscore yards and ten from
    the target. One arrow shooteth each man first, and from all the archers
    shall the ten that shooteth the fairest shafts be chosen for to shoot
    again. Two arrows shooteth each man of these ten, then shall the three
    that shoot the fairest shafts be chosen for to shoot again. Three arrows
    shooteth each man of those three, and to him that shooteth the fairest
    shafts shall the prize be given."

    Then the Sheriff leaned forward, looking keenly among the press of
    archers to find whether Robin Hood was among them; but no one was
    there clad in Lincoln green, such as was worn by Robin and his band.
    "Nevertheless," said the Sheriff to himself, "he may still be there, and
    I miss him among the crowd of other men. But let me see when but ten men
    shoot, for I wot he will be among the ten, or I know him not."

    And now the archers shot, each man in turn, and the good folk never saw
    such archery as was done that day. Six arrows were within the clout,
    four within the black, and only two smote the outer ring; so that when
    the last arrow sped and struck the target, all the people shouted aloud,
    for it was noble shooting.

    And now but ten men were left of all those that had shot before, and
    of these ten, six were famous throughout the land, and most of the folk
    gathered there knew them. These six men were Gilbert o' the Red Cap,
    Adam o' the Dell, Diccon Cruikshank, William o' Leslie, Hubert o' Cloud,
    and Swithin o' Hertford. Two others were yeomen of merry Yorkshire,
    another was a tall stranger in blue, who said he came from London Town,
    and the last was a tattered stranger in scarlet, who wore a patch over
    one eye.

    "Now," quoth the Sheriff to a man-at-arms who stood near him, "seest
    thou Robin Hood among those ten?"

    "Nay, that do I not, Your Worship," answered the man. "Six of them I
    know right well. Of those Yorkshire yeomen, one is too tall and the
    other too short for that bold knave. Robin's beard is as yellow as gold,
    while yon tattered beggar in scarlet hath a beard of brown, besides
    being blind of one eye. As for the stranger in blue, Robin's shoulders,
    I ween, are three inches broader than his."

    "Then," quoth the Sheriff, smiting his thigh angrily, "yon knave is a
    coward as well as a rogue, and dares not show his face among good men
    and true."

    Then, after they had rested a short time, those ten stout men stepped
    forth to shoot again. Each man shot two arrows, and as they shot, not
    a word was spoken, but all the crowd watched with scarce a breath of
    sound; but when the last had shot his arrow another great shout arose,
    while many cast their caps aloft for joy of such marvelous shooting.

    "Now by our gracious Lady fair," quoth old Sir Amyas o' the Dell, who,
    bowed with fourscore years and more, sat near the Sheriff, "ne'er saw
    I such archery in all my life before, yet have I seen the best hands at
    the longbow for threescore years and more."

    And now but three men were left of all those that had shot before. One
    was Gill o' the Red Cap, one the tattered stranger in scarlet, and one
    Adam o' the Dell of Tamworth Town. Then all the people called aloud,
    some crying, "Ho for Gilbert o' the Red Cap!" and some, "Hey for stout
    Adam o' Tamworth!" But not a single man in the crowd called upon the
    stranger in scarlet.

    "Now, shoot thou well, Gilbert," cried the Sheriff, "and if thine be the
    best shaft, fivescore broad silver pennies will I give to thee beside
    the prize."

    "Truly I will do my best," quoth Gilbert right sturdily. "A man cannot
    do aught but his best, but that will I strive to do this day." So
    saying, he drew forth a fair smooth arrow with a broad feather and
    fitted it deftly to the string, then drawing his bow with care he
    sped the shaft. Straight flew the arrow and lit fairly in the clout, a
    finger's-breadth from the center. "A Gilbert, a Gilbert!" shouted all
    the crowd; and, "Now, by my faith," cried the Sheriff, smiting his hands
    together, "that is a shrewd shot."

    Then the tattered stranger stepped forth, and all the people laughed as
    they saw a yellow patch that showed beneath his arm when he raised his
    elbow to shoot, and also to see him aim with but one eye. He drew the
    good yew bow quickly, and quickly loosed a shaft; so short was the time
    that no man could draw a breath betwixt the drawing and the shooting;
    yet his arrow lodged nearer the center than the other by twice the
    length of a barleycorn.

    "Now by all the saints in Paradise!" cried the Sheriff, "that is a
    lovely shaft in very truth!"

    Then Adam o' the Dell shot, carefully and cautiously, and his arrow
    lodged close beside the stranger's. Then after a short space they all
    three shot again, and once more each arrow lodged within the clout, but
    this time Adam o' the Dell's was farthest from the center, and again the
    tattered stranger's shot was the best. Then, after another time of rest,
    they all shot for the third time. This time Gilbert took great heed to
    his aim, keenly measuring the distance and shooting with shrewdest care.
    Straight flew the arrow, and all shouted till the very flags that
    waved in the breeze shook with the sound, and the rooks and daws flew
    clamoring about the roofs of the old gray tower, for the shaft had
    lodged close beside the spot that marked the very center.

    "Well done, Gilbert!" cried the Sheriff right joyously. "Fain am I
    to believe the prize is thine, and right fairly won. Now, thou ragged
    knave, let me see thee shoot a better shaft than that."

    Nought spake the stranger but took his place, while all was hushed, and
    no one spoke or even seemed to breathe, so great was the silence
    for wonder what he would do. Meanwhile, also, quite still stood the
    stranger, holding his bow in his hand, while one could count five; then
    he drew his trusty yew, holding it drawn but a moment, then loosed the
    string. Straight flew the arrow, and so true that it smote a gray goose
    feather from off Gilbert's shaft, which fell fluttering through the
    sunlit air as the stranger's arrow lodged close beside his of the Red
    Cap, and in the very center. No one spoke a word for a while and no one
    shouted, but each man looked into his neighbor's face amazedly.

    "Nay," quoth old Adam o' the Dell presently, drawing a long breath
    and shaking his head as he spoke, "twoscore years and more have I shot
    shaft, and maybe not all times bad, but I shoot no more this day, for
    no man can match with yon stranger, whosoe'er he may be." Then he
    thrust his shaft into his quiver, rattling, and unstrung his bow without
    another word.

    Then the Sheriff came down from his dais and drew near, in all his silks
    and velvets, to where the tattered stranger stood leaning upon his
    stout bow, while the good folk crowded around to see the man who shot so
    wondrously well. "Here, good fellow," quoth the Sheriff, "take thou
    the prize, and well and fairly hast thou won it, I bow. What may be thy
    name, and whence comest thou?"

    "Men do call me Jock o' Teviotdale, and thence am I come," said the
    stranger.

    "Then, by Our Lady, Jock, thou art the fairest archer that e'er mine
    eyes beheld, and if thou wilt join my service I will clothe thee with a
    better coat than that thou hast upon thy back; thou shalt eat and drink
    of the best, and at every Christmastide fourscore marks shall be thy
    wage. I trow thou drawest better bow than that same coward knave Robin
    Hood, that dared not show his face here this day. Say, good fellow, wilt
    thou join my service?"

    "Nay, that will I not," quoth the stranger roughly. "I will be mine own,
    and no man in all merry England shall be my master."

    "Then get thee gone, and a murrain seize thee!" cried the Sheriff, and
    his voice trembled with anger. "And by my faith and troth, I have a good
    part of a mind to have thee beaten for thine insolence!" Then he turned
    upon his heel and strode away.

    It was a right motley company that gathered about the noble greenwood
    tree in Sherwood's depths that same day. A score and more of barefoot
    friars were there, and some that looked like tinkers, and some that
    seemed to be sturdy beggars and rustic hinds; and seated upon a mossy
    couch was one all clad in tattered scarlet, with a patch over one eye;
    and in his hand he held the golden arrow that was the prize of the great
    shooting match. Then, amidst a noise of talking and laughter, he took
    the patch from off his eye and stripped away the scarlet rags from off
    his body and showed himself all clothed in fair Lincoln green; and
    quoth he, "Easy come these things away, but walnut stain cometh not so
    speedily from yellow hair." Then all laughed louder than before, for it
    was Robin Hood himself that had won the prize from the Sheriff's very
    hands.

    Then all sat down to the woodland feast and talked among themselves
    of the merry jest that had been played upon the Sheriff, and of the
    adventures that had befallen each member of the band in his disguise.
    But when the feast was done, Robin Hood took Little John apart and said,
    "Truly am I vexed in my blood, for I heard the Sheriff say today, 'Thou
    shootest better than that coward knave Robin Hood, that dared not show
    his face here this day.' I would fain let him know who it was who won
    the golden arrow from out his hand, and also that I am no coward such as
    he takes me to be."

    Then Little John said, "Good master, take thou me and Will Stutely, and
    we will send yon fat Sheriff news of all this by a messenger such as he
    doth not expect."

    That day the Sheriff sat at meat in the great hall of his house
    at Nottingham Town. Long tables stood down the hall, at which sat
    men-at-arms and household servants and good stout villains,(1) in all
    fourscore and more. There they talked of the day's shooting as they ate
    their meat and quaffed their ale. The Sheriff sat at the head of the
    table upon a raised seat under a canopy, and beside him sat his dame.

         (1) Bond-servants.

    "By my troth," said he, "I did reckon full roundly that that knave Robin
    Hood would be at the game today. I did not think that he was such a
    coward. But who could that saucy knave be who answered me to my beard
    so bravely? I wonder that I did not have him beaten; but there was
    something about him that spoke of other things than rags and tatters."

    Then, even as he finished speaking, something fell rattling among the
    dishes on the table, while those that sat near started up wondering
    what it might be. After a while one of the men-at-arms gathered courage
    enough to pick it up and bring it to the Sheriff. Then everyone saw
    that it was a blunted gray goose shaft, with a fine scroll, about the
    thickness of a goose quill, tied near to its head. The Sheriff opened
    the scroll and glanced at it, while the veins upon his forehead swelled
    and his cheeks grew ruddy with rage as he read, for this was what he
    saw:

         "_Now Heaven bless Thy Grace this day
         Say all in sweet Sherwood
         For thou didst give the prize away
         To merry Robin Hood_."

    "Whence came this?" cried the Sheriff in a mighty voice.

    "Even through the window, Your Worship," quoth the man who had handed
    the shaft to him.




    Will Stutely Rescued by His Companions

    NOW WHEN THE SHERIFF found that neither law nor guile could overcome
    Robin Hood, he was much perplexed, and said to himself, "Fool that I am!
    Had I not told our King of Robin Hood, I would not have gotten myself
    into such a coil; but now I must either take him captive or have wrath
    visited upon my head from his most gracious Majesty. I have tried law,
    and I have tried guile, and I have failed in both; so I will try what
    may be done with might."

    Thus communing within himself, he called his constables together and
    told them what was in his mind. "Now take ye each four men, all armed
    in proof," said he, "and get ye gone to the forest, at different points,
    and lie in wait for this same Robin Hood. But if any constable finds
    too many men against him, let him sound a horn, and then let each band
    within hearing come with all speed and join the party that calls them.
    Thus, I think, shall we take this green-clad knave. Furthermore, to him
    that first meeteth with Robin Hood shall one hundred pounds of silver
    money be given, if he be brought to me dead or alive; and to him that
    meeteth with any of his band shall twoscore pounds be given, if such be
    brought to me dead or alive. So, be ye bold and be ye crafty."

    So thus they went in threescore companies of five to Sherwood Forest, to
    take Robin Hood, each constable wishing that he might be the one to find
    the bold outlaw, or at least one of his band. For seven days and nights
    they hunted through the forest glades, but never saw so much as a single
    man in Lincoln green; for tidings of all this had been brought to Robin
    Hood by trusty Eadom o' the Blue Boar.

    When he first heard the news, Robin said, "If the Sheriff dare send
    force to meet force, woe will it be for him and many a better man
    besides, for blood will flow and there will be great trouble for all.
    But fain would I shun blood and battle, and fain would I not deal sorrow
    to womenfolk and wives because good stout yeomen lose their lives. Once
    I slew a man, and never do I wish to slay a man again, for it is bitter
    for the soul to think thereon. So now we will abide silently in Sherwood
    Forest, so that it may be well for all, but should we be forced to
    defend ourselves, or any of our band, then let each man draw bow and
    brand with might and main."

    At this speech many of the band shook their heads, and said to
    themselves, "Now the Sheriff will think that we are cowards, and folk
    will scoff throughout the countryside, saying that we fear to meet these
    men." But they said nothing aloud, swallowing their words and doing as
    Robin bade them.

    Thus they hid in the depths of Sherwood Forest for seven days and seven
    nights and never showed their faces abroad in all that time; but early
    in the morning of the eighth day Robin Hood called the band together and
    said, "Now who will go and find what the Sheriff's men are at by this
    time? For I know right well they will not bide forever within Sherwood
    shades."

    At this a great shout arose, and each man waved his bow aloft and cried
    that he might be the one to go. Then Robin Hood's heart was proud when
    he looked around on his stout, brave fellows, and he said, "Brave and
    true are ye all, my merry men, and a right stout band of good fellows
    are ye, but ye cannot all go, so I will choose one from among you, and
    it shall be good Will Stutely, for he is as sly as e'er an old dog fox
    in Sherwood Forest."

    Then Will Stutely leaped high aloft and laughed loudly, clapping his
    hands for pure joy that he should have been chosen from among them all.
    "Now thanks, good master," quoth he, "and if I bring not news of those
    knaves to thee, call me no more thy sly Will Stutely."

    Then he clad himself in a friar's gown, and underneath the robe he hung
    a good broadsword in such a place that he could easily lay hands upon
    it. Thus clad, he set forth upon his quest, until he came to the verge
    of the forest, and so to the highway. He saw two bands of the Sheriff's
    men, yet he turned neither to the right nor the left, but only drew his
    cowl the closer over his face, folding his hands as if in meditation.
    So at last he came to the Sign of the Blue Boar. "For," quoth he to
    himself, "our good friend Eadom will tell me all the news."

    At the Sign of the Blue Boar he found a band of the Sheriffs men
    drinking right lustily; so, without speaking to anyone, he sat down upon
    a distant bench, his staff in his hand, and his head bowed forward as
    though he were meditating. Thus he sat waiting until he might see the
    landlord apart, and Eadom did not know him, but thought him to be some
    poor tired friar, so he let him sit without saying a word to him or
    molesting him, though he liked not the cloth. "For," said he to himself,
    "it is a hard heart that kicks the lame dog from off the sill." As
    Stutely sat thus, there came a great house cat and rubbed against his
    knee, raising his robe a palm's-breadth high. Stutely pushed his robe
    quickly down again, but the constable who commanded the Sheriffs men
    saw what had passed, and saw also fair Lincoln green beneath the friar's
    robe. He said nothing at the time, but communed within himself in this
    wise: "Yon is no friar of orders gray, and also, I wot, no honest yeoman
    goeth about in priest's garb, nor doth a thief go so for nought. Now I
    think in good sooth that is one of Robin Hood's own men." So, presently,
    he said aloud, "O holy father, wilt thou not take a good pot of March
    beer to slake thy thirsty soul withal?"

    But Stutely shook his head silently, for he said to himself, "Maybe
    there be those here who know my voice."

    Then the constable said again, "Whither goest thou, holy friar, upon
    this hot summer's day?"

    "I go a pilgrim to Canterbury Town," answered Will Stutely, speaking
    gruffly, so that none might know his voice.

    Then the constable said, for the third time, "Now tell me, holy father,
    do pilgrims to Canterbury wear good Lincoln green beneath their robes?
    Ha! By my faith, I take thee to be some lusty thief, and perhaps one of
    Robin Hood's own band! Now, by Our Lady's grace, if thou movest hand or
    foot, I will run thee through the body with my sword!"

    Then he flashed forth his bright sword and leaped upon Will Stutely,
    thinking he would take him unaware; but Stutely had his own sword
    tightly held in his hand, beneath his robe, so he drew it forth before
    the constable came upon him. Then the stout constable struck a mighty
    blow; but he struck no more in all that fight, for Stutely, parrying the
    blow right deftly, smote the constable back again with all his might.
    Then he would have escaped, but could not, for the other, all dizzy with
    the wound and with the flowing blood, seized him by the knees with his
    arms even as he reeled and fell. Then the others rushed upon him, and
    Stutely struck again at another of the Sheriff's men, but the steel
    cap glanced the blow, and though the blade bit deep, it did not kill.
    Meanwhile, the constable, fainting as he was, drew Stutely downward, and
    the others, seeing the yeoman hampered so, rushed upon him again, and
    one smote him a blow upon the crown so that the blood ran down his face
    and blinded him. Then, staggering, he fell, and all sprang upon him,
    though he struggled so manfully that they could hardly hold him fast.
    Then they bound him with stout hempen cords so that he could not move
    either hand or foot, and thus they overcame him.

    Robin Hood stood under the greenwood tree, thinking of Will Stutely and
    how he might be faring, when suddenly he saw two of his stout yeomen
    come running down the forest path, and betwixt them ran buxom Maken
    of the Blue Boar. Then Robin's heart fell, for he knew they were the
    bearers of ill tidings.

    "Will Stutely hath been taken," cried they, when they had come to where
    he stood.

    "And is it thou that hast brought such doleful news?" said Robin to the
    lass.

    "Ay, marry, for I saw it all," cried she, panting as the hare pants when
    it has escaped the hounds, "and I fear he is wounded sore, for one smote
    him main shrewdly i' the crown. They have bound him and taken him to
    Nottingham Town, and ere I left the Blue Boar I heard that he should be
    hanged tomorrow day."

    "He shall not be hanged tomorrow day," cried Robin; "or, if he be,
    full many a one shall gnaw the sod, and many shall have cause to cry
    Alack-a-day!"

    Then he clapped his horn to his lips and blew three blasts right loudly,
    and presently his good yeomen came running through the greenwood until
    sevenscore bold blades were gathered around him.

    "Now hark you all!" cried Robin. "Our dear companion Will Stutely hath
    been taken by that vile Sheriff's men, therefore doth it behoove us to
    take bow and brand in hand to bring him off again; for I wot that we
    ought to risk life and limb for him, as he hath risked life and limb for
    us. Is it not so, my merry men all?" Then all cried, "Ay!" with a great
    voice.

    So the next day they all wended their way from Sherwood Forest, but by
    different paths, for it behooved them to be very crafty; so the band
    separated into parties of twos and threes, which were all to meet again
    in a tangled dell that lay near to Nottingham Town. Then, when they had
    all gathered together at the place of meeting, Robin spoke to them thus:

    "Now we will lie here in ambush until we can get news, for it doth
    behoove us to be cunning and wary if we would bring our friend Will
    Stutely off from the Sheriff's clutches."

    So they lay hidden a long time, until the sun stood high in the sky. The
    day was warm and the dusty road was bare of travelers, except an aged
    palmer who walked slowly along the highroad that led close beside
    the gray castle wall of Nottingham Town. When Robin saw that no other
    wayfarer was within sight, he called young David of Doncaster, who was
    a shrewd man for his years, and said to him, "Now get thee forth, young
    David, and speak to yonder palmer that walks beside the town wall, for
    he hath come but now from Nottingham Town, and may tell thee news of
    good Stutely, perchance."

    So David strode forth, and when he came up to the pilgrim, he saluted
    him and said, "Good morrow, holy father, and canst thou tell me when
    Will Stutely will be hanged upon the gallows tree? I fain would not miss
    the sight, for I have come from afar to see so sturdy a rogue hanged."

    "Now, out upon thee, young man," cried the Palmer, "that thou shouldst
    speak so when a good stout man is to be hanged for nothing but guarding
    his own life!" And he struck his staff upon the ground in anger. "Alas,
    say I, that this thing should be! For even this day, toward evening,
    when the sun falleth low, he shall be hanged, fourscore rods from the
    great town gate of Nottingham, where three roads meet; for there
    the Sheriff sweareth he shall die as a warning to all outlaws in
    Nottinghamshire. But yet, I say again, Alas! For, though Robin Hood and
    his band may be outlaws, yet he taketh only from the rich and the strong
    and the dishonest man, while there is not a poor widow nor a peasant
    with many children, nigh to Sherwood, but has barley flour enough all
    the year long through him. It grieves my heart to see one as gallant as
    this Stutely die, for I have been a good Saxon yeoman in my day, ere
    I turned palmer, and well I know a stout hand and one that smiteth
    shrewdly at a cruel Norman or a proud abbot with fat moneybags. Had good
    Stutely's master but known how his man was compassed about with perils,
    perchance he might send succor to bring him out of the hand of his
    enemies.

    "Ay, marry, that is true," cried the young man. "If Robin and his men
    be nigh this place, I wot right well they will strive to bring him forth
    from his peril. But fare thee well, thou good old man, and believe me,
    if Will Stutely die, he shall be right well avenged."

    Then he turned and strode rapidly away; but the Palmer looked after him,
    muttering, "I wot that youth is no country hind that hath come to see
    a good man die. Well, well, perchance Robin Hood is not so far away
    but that there will be stout doings this day." So he went upon his way,
    muttering to himself.

    When David of Doncaster told Robin Hood what the Palmer had said to him,
    Robin called the band around him and spoke to them thus:

    "Now let us get straightway into Nottingham Town and mix ourselves with
    the people there; but keep ye one another in sight, pressing as near
    the prisoner and his guards as ye can, when they come outside the walls.
    Strike no man without need, for I would fain avoid bloodshed, but if ye
    do strike, strike hard, and see that there be no need to strike again.
    Then keep all together until we come again to Sherwood, and let no man
    leave his fellows."

    The sun was low in the western sky when a bugle note sounded from the
    castle wall. Then all was bustle in Nottingham Town and crowds filled
    the streets, for all knew that the famous Will Stutely was to be hanged
    that day. Presently the castle gates opened wide and a great array of
    men-at-arms came forth with noise and clatter, the Sheriff, all clad in
    shining mail of linked chain, riding at their head. In the midst of all
    the guard, in a cart, with a halter about his neck, rode Will Stutely.
    His face was pale with his wound and with loss of blood, like the moon
    in broad daylight, and his fair hair was clotted in points upon his
    forehead, where the blood had hardened. When he came forth from the
    castle he looked up and he looked down, but though he saw some faces
    that showed pity and some that showed friendliness, he saw none that
    he knew. Then his heart sank within him like a plummet of lead, but
    nevertheless he spoke up boldly.

    "Give a sword into my hand, Sir Sheriff," said he, "and wounded man
    though I be, I will fight thee and all thy men till life and strength be
    gone."

    "Nay, thou naughty varlet," quoth the Sheriff, turning his head and
    looking right grimly upon Will Stutely, "thou shalt have no sword but
    shall die a mean death, as beseemeth a vile thief like thee."

    "Then do but untie my hands and I will fight thee and thy men with no
    weapon but only my naked fists. I crave no weapon, but let me not be
    meanly hanged this day."

    Then the Sheriff laughed aloud. "Why, how now," quoth he, "is thy proud
    stomach quailing? Shrive thyself, thou vile knave, for I mean that thou
    shalt hang this day, and that where three roads meet, so that all men
    shall see thee hang, for carrion crows and daws to peck at."

    "O thou dastard heart!" cried Will Stutely, gnashing his teeth at the
    Sheriff. "Thou coward hind! If ever my good master meet thee thou shalt
    pay dearly for this day's work! He doth scorn thee, and so do all brave
    hearts. Knowest thou not that thou and thy name are jests upon the lips
    of every brave yeoman? Such a one as thou art, thou wretched craven,
    will never be able to subdue bold Robin Hood."

    "Ha!" cried the Sheriff in a rage, "is it even so? Am I a jest with thy
    master, as thou callest him? Now I will make a jest of thee and a sorry
    jest withal, for I will quarter thee limb from limb, after thou art
    hanged." Then he spurred his horse forward and said no more to Stutely.

    At last they came to the great town gate, through which Stutely saw the
    fair country beyond, with hills and dales all clothed in verdure, and
    far away the dusky line of Sherwood's skirts. Then when he saw the
    slanting sunlight lying on field and fallow, shining redly here and
    there on cot and farmhouse, and when he heard the sweet birds singing
    their vespers, and the sheep bleating upon the hillside, and beheld the
    swallows flying in the bright air, there came a great fullness to his
    heart so that all things blurred to his sight through salt tears, and he
    bowed his head lest the folk should think him unmanly when they saw
    the tears in his eyes. Thus he kept his head bowed till they had passed
    through the gate and were outside the walls of the town. But when he
    looked up again he felt his heart leap within him and then stand still
    for pure joy, for he saw the face of one of his own dear companions of
    merry Sherwood; then glancing quickly around he saw well-known faces
    upon all sides of him, crowding closely upon the men-at-arms who were
    guarding him. Then of a sudden the blood sprang to his cheeks, for he
    saw for a moment his own good master in the press and, seeing him, knew
    that Robin Hood and all his band were there. Yet betwixt him and them
    was a line of men-at-arms.

    "Now, stand back!" cried the Sheriff in a mighty voice, for the crowd
    pressed around on all sides. "What mean ye, varlets, that ye push upon
    us so? Stand back, I say!"

    Then came a bustle and a noise, and one strove to push between the
    men-at-arms so as to reach the cart, and Stutely saw that it was Little
    John that made all that stir.

    "Now stand thou back!" cried one of the men-at-arms whom Little John
    pushed with his elbows.

    "Now stand thou back thine own self," quoth Little John, and straightway
    smote the man a buffet beside his head that felled him as a butcher
    fells an ox, and then he leaped to the cart where Stutely sat.

    "I pray thee take leave of thy friends ere thou diest, Will," quoth he,
    "or maybe I will die with thee if thou must die, for I could never have
    better company." Then with one stroke he cut the bonds that bound the
    other's arms and legs, and Stutely leaped straightway from the cart.

    "Now as I live," cried the Sheriff, "yon varlet I know right well is a
    sturdy rebel! Take him, I bid you all, and let him not go!"

    So saying, he spurred his horse upon Little John, and rising in his
    stirrups smote with might and main, but Little John ducked quickly
    underneath the horse's belly and the blow whistled harmlessly over his
    head.

    "Nay, good Sir Sheriff," cried he, leaping up again when the blow had
    passed, "I must e'en borrow thy most worshipful sword." Thereupon he
    twitched the weapon deftly from out the Sheriff's hand, "Here, Stutely,"
    he cried, "the Sheriff hath lent thee his sword! Back to back with me,
    man, and defend thyself, for help is nigh!"

    "Down with them!" bellowed the Sheriff in a voice like an angry bull;
    and he spurred his horse upon the two who now stood back to back,
    forgetting in his rage that he had no weapon with which to defend
    himself.

    "Stand back, Sheriff!" cried Little John; and even as he spoke, a bugle
    horn sounded shrilly and a clothyard shaft whistled within an inch of
    the Sheriff's head. Then came a swaying hither and thither, and oaths,
    cries, and groans, and clashing of steel, and swords flashed in the
    setting sun, and a score of arrows whistled through the air. And some
    cried, "Help, help!" and some, "A rescue, a rescue!"

    "Treason!" cried the Sheriff in a loud voice. "Bear back! Bear back!
    Else we be all dead men!" Thereupon he reined his horse backward through
    the thickest of the crowd.

    Now Robin Hood and his band might have slain half of the Sheriff's men
    had they desired to do so, but they let them push out of the press and
    get them gone, only sending a bunch of arrows after them to hurry them
    in their flight.

    "Oh stay!" shouted Will Stutely after the Sheriff. "Thou wilt never
    catch bold Robin Hood if thou dost not stand to meet him face to face."
    But the Sheriff, bowing along his horse's back, made no answer but only
    spurred the faster.

    Then Will Stutely turned to Little John and looked him in the face till
    the tears ran down from his eyes and he wept aloud; and kissing his
    friend's cheeks, "O Little John!" quoth he, "mine own true friend, and
    he that I love better than man or woman in all the world beside!
    Little did I reckon to see thy face this day, or to meet thee this side
    Paradise." Little John could make no answer, but wept also.

    Then Robin Hood gathered his band together in a close rank, with Will
    Stutely in the midst, and thus they moved slowly away toward Sherwood,
    and were gone, as a storm cloud moves away from the spot where a tempest
    has swept the land. But they left ten of the Sheriff's men lying along
    the ground wounded - some more, some less - yet no one knew who smote them
    down.

    Thus the Sheriff of Nottingham tried thrice to take Robin Hood and
    failed each time; and the last time he was frightened, for he felt how
    near he had come to losing his life; so he said, "These men fear neither
    God nor man, nor king nor king's officers. I would sooner lose mine
    office than my life, so I will trouble them no more." So he kept close
    within his castle for many a day and dared not show his face outside of
    his own household, and all the time he was gloomy and would speak to no
    one, for he was ashamed of what had happened that day.




    Robin Hood Turns Butcher

    NOW AFTER all these things had happened, and it became known to Robin
    Hood how the Sheriff had tried three times to make him captive, he said
    to himself, "If I have the chance, I will make our worshipful Sheriff
    pay right well for that which he hath done to me. Maybe I may bring him
    some time into Sherwood Forest and have him to a right merry feast with
    us." For when Robin Hood caught a baron or a squire, or a fat abbot or
    bishop, he brought them to the greenwood tree and feasted them before he
    lightened their purses.

    But in the meantime Robin Hood and his band lived quietly in Sherwood
    Forest, without showing their faces abroad, for Robin knew that it would
    not be wise for him to be seen in the neighborhood of Nottingham, those
    in authority being very wroth with him. But though they did not go
    abroad, they lived a merry life within the woodlands, spending the days
    in shooting at garlands hung upon a willow wand at the end of the glade,
    the leafy aisles ringing with merry jests and laughter: for whoever
    missed the garland was given a sound buffet, which, if delivered by
    Little John, never failed to topple over the unfortunate yeoman. Then
    they had bouts of wrestling and of cudgel play, so that every day they
    gained in skill and strength.

    Thus they dwelled for nearly a year, and in that time Robin Hood often
    turned over in his mind many means of making an even score with the
    Sheriff. At last he began to fret at his confinement; so one day he took
    up his stout cudgel and set forth to seek adventure, strolling blithely
    along until he came to the edge of Sherwood. There, as he rambled along
    the sunlit road, he met a lusty young butcher driving a fine mare and
    riding in a stout new cart, all hung about with meat. Merrily whistled
    the Butcher as he jogged along, for he was going to the market, and the
    day was fresh and sweet, making his heart blithe within him.

    "Good morrow to thee, jolly fellow," quoth Robin, "thou seemest happy
    this merry morn."

    "Ay, that am I," quoth the jolly Butcher, "and why should I not be so?
    Am I not hale in wind and limb? Have I not the bonniest lass in all
    Nottinghamshire? And lastly, am I not to be married to her on Thursday
    next in sweet Locksley Town?"

    "Ha," said Robin, "comest thou from Locksley Town? Well do I know that
    fair place for miles about, and well do I know each hedgerow and gentle
    pebbly stream, and even all the bright little fishes therein, for
    there I was born and bred. Now, where goest thou with thy meat, my fair
    friend?"

    "I go to the market at Nottingham Town to sell my beef and my mutton,"
    answered the Butcher. "But who art thou that comest from Locksley Town?"

    "A yeoman am I, and men do call me Robin Hood."

    "Now, by Our Lady's grace," cried the Butcher, "well do I know thy name,
    and many a time have I heard thy deeds both sung and spoken of. But
    Heaven forbid that thou shouldst take aught of me! An honest man am I,
    and have wronged neither man nor maid; so trouble me not, good master,
    as I have never troubled thee."

    "Nay, Heaven forbid, indeed," quoth Robin, "that I should take from such
    as thee, jolly fellow! Not so much as one farthing would I take
    from thee, for I love a fair Saxon face like thine right well - more
    especially when it cometh from Locksley Town, and most especially when
    the man that owneth it is to marry a bonny lass on Thursday next. But
    come, tell me for what price thou wilt sell me all of thy meat and thy
    horse and cart."

    "At four marks do I value meat, cart, and mare," quoth the Butcher, "but
    if I do not sell all my meat I will not have four marks in value."

    Then Robin Hood plucked the purse from his girdle, and quoth he, "Here
    in this purse are six marks. Now, I would fain be a butcher for the day
    and sell my meat in Nottingham Town. Wilt thou close a bargain with me
    and take six marks for thine outfit?"

    "Now may the blessings of all the saints fall on thine honest head!"
    cried the Butcher right joyfully, as he leaped down from his cart and
    took the purse that Robin held out to him.

    "Nay," quoth Robin, laughing loudly, "many do like me and wish me well,
    but few call me honest. Now get thee gone back to thy lass, and give her
    a sweet kiss from me." So saying, he donned the Butcher's apron, and,
    climbing into the cart, he took the reins in his hand and drove off
    through the forest to Nottingham Town.

    When he came to Nottingham, he entered that part of the market where
    butchers stood, and took up his inn(2) in the best place he could find.
    Next, he opened his stall and spread his meat upon the bench, then,
    taking his cleaver and steel and clattering them together, he trolled
    aloud in merry tones:

         (2) Stand for selling.

         "Now come, ye lasses, and eke ye dames,
         And buy your meat from me;
         For three pennyworths of meat I sell
         For the charge of one penny.

         "Lamb have I that hath fed upon nought
         But the dainty dames pied,
         And the violet sweet, and the daffodil
         That grow fair streams beside.

         "And beef have I from the heathery words,
         And mutton from dales all green,
         And veal as white as a maiden's brow,
         With its mother's milk, I ween.

         "Then come, ye lasses, and eke ye dames,
         Come, buy your meat from me,
         For three pennyworths of meat I sell
         For the charge of one penny."

    Thus he sang blithely, while all who stood near listened amazedly. Then,
    when he had finished, he clattered the steel and cleaver still more
    loudly, shouting lustily, "Now, who'll buy? Who'll buy? Four fixed
    prices have I. Three pennyworths of meat I sell to a fat friar or priest
    for sixpence, for I want not their custom; stout aldermen I charge
    threepence, for it doth not matter to me whether they buy or not; to
    buxom dames I sell three pennyworths of meat for one penny for I like
    their custom well; but to the bonny lass that hath a liking for a good
    tight butcher I charge nought but one fair kiss, for I like her custom
    the best of all."

    Then all began to stare and wonder and crowd around, laughing, for never
    was such selling heard of in all Nottingham Town; but when they came to
    buy they found it as he had said, for he gave goodwife or dame as much
    meat for one penny as they could buy elsewhere for three, and when a
    widow or a poor woman came to him, he gave her flesh for nothing; but
    when a merry lass came and gave him a kiss, he charged not one penny for
    his meat; and many such came to his stall, for his eyes were as blue as
    the skies of June, and he laughed merrily, giving to each full measure.
    Thus he sold his meat so fast that no butcher that stood near him could
    sell anything.

    Then they began to talk among themselves, and some said, "This must be
    some thief who has stolen cart, horse, and meat;" but others said, "Nay,
    when did ye ever see a thief who parted with his goods so freely and
    merrily? This must be some prodigal who hath sold his father's land, and
    would fain live merrily while the money lasts." And these latter being
    the greater number, the others came round, one by one to their way of
    thinking.

    Then some of the butchers came to him to make his acquaintance. "Come,
    brother," quoth one who was the head of them all, "we be all of one
    trade, so wilt thou go dine with us? For this day the Sheriff hath asked
    all the Butcher Guild to feast with him at the Guild Hall. There will
    be stout fare and much to drink, and that thou likest, or I much mistake
    thee."

    "Now, beshrew his heart," quoth jolly Robin, "that would deny a butcher.
    And, moreover, I will go dine with you all, my sweet lads, and that as
    fast as I can hie." Whereupon, having sold all his meat, he closed his
    stall and went with them to the great Guild Hall.

    There the Sheriff had already come in state, and with him many butchers.
    When Robin and those that were with him came in, all laughing at some
    merry jest he had been telling them, those that were near the Sheriff
    whispered to him, "Yon is a right mad blade, for he hath sold more meat
    for one penny this day than we could sell for three, and to whatsoever
    merry lass gave him a kiss he gave meat for nought." And others said,
    "He is some prodigal that hath sold his land for silver and gold, and
    meaneth to spend all right merrily."

    Then the Sheriff called Robin to him, not knowing him in his butcher's
    dress, and made him sit close to him on his right hand; for he loved a
    rich young prodigal - especially when he thought that he might lighten
    that prodigal's pockets into his own most worshipful purse. So he made
    much of Robin, and laughed and talked with him more than with any of the
    others.

    At last the dinner was ready to be served and the Sheriff bade Robin say
    grace, so Robin stood up and said, "Now Heaven bless us all and eke good
    meat and good sack within this house, and may all butchers be and remain
    as honest men as I am."

    At this all laughed, the Sheriff loudest of all, for he said to himself,
    "Surely this is indeed some prodigal, and perchance I may empty his
    purse of some of the money that the fool throweth about so freely." Then
    he spake aloud to Robin, saying, "Thou art a jolly young blade, and I
    love thee mightily;" and he smote Robin upon the shoulder.

    Then Robin laughed loudly too. "Yea," quoth he, "I know thou dost love
    a jolly blade, for didst thou not have jolly Robin Hood at thy shooting
    match and didst thou not gladly give him a bright golden arrow for his
    own?"

    At this the Sheriff looked grave and all the guild of butchers too, so
    that none laughed but Robin, only some winked slyly at each other.

    "Come, fill us some sack!" cried Robin. "Let us e'er be merry while we
    may, for man is but dust, and he hath but a span to live here till the
    worm getteth him, as our good gossip Swanthold sayeth; so let life be
    merry while it lasts, say I. Nay, never look down i' the mouth, Sir
    Sheriff. Who knowest but that thou mayest catch Robin Hood yet, if thou
    drinkest less good sack and Malmsey, and bringest down the fat about thy
    paunch and the dust from out thy brain. Be merry, man."

    Then the Sheriff laughed again, but not as though he liked the jest,
    while the butchers said, one to another, "Before Heaven, never have
    we seen such a mad rollicking blade. Mayhap, though, he will make the
    Sheriff mad."

    "How now, brothers," cried Robin, "be merry! nay, never count over your
    farthings, for by this and by that I will pay this shot myself, e'en
    though it cost two hundred pounds. So let no man draw up his lip, nor
    thrust his forefinger into his purse, for I swear that neither butcher
    nor Sheriff shall pay one penny for this feast."

    "Now thou art a right merry soul," quoth the Sheriff, "and I wot thou
    must have many a head of horned beasts and many an acre of land, that
    thou dost spend thy money so freely."

    "Ay, that have I," quoth Robin, laughing loudly again, "five hundred and
    more horned beasts have I and my brothers, and none of them have we been
    able to sell, else I might not have turned butcher. As for my land, I
    have never asked my steward how many acres I have."

    At this the Sheriff's eyes twinkled, and he chuckled to himself. "Nay,
    good youth," quoth he, "if thou canst not sell thy cattle, it may be I
    will find a man that will lift them from thy hands; perhaps that man may
    be myself, for I love a merry youth and would help such a one along the
    path of life. Now how much dost thou want for thy horned cattle?"

    "Well," quoth Robin, "they are worth at least five hundred pounds."

    "Nay," answered the Sheriff slowly, and as if he were thinking within
    himself, "well do I love thee, and fain would I help thee along, but
    five hundred pounds in money is a good round sum; besides I have it not
    by me. Yet I will give thee three hundred pounds for them all, and that
    in good hard silver and gold."

    "Now thou old miser!" quoth Robin, "well thou knowest that so many
    horned cattle are worth seven hundred pounds and more, and even that is
    but small for them, and yet thou, with thy gray hairs and one foot in
    the grave, wouldst trade upon the folly of a wild youth."

    At this the Sheriff looked grimly at Robin. "Nay," quoth Robin, "look
    not on me as though thou hadst sour beer in thy mouth, man. I will take
    thine offer, for I and my brothers do need the money. We lead a merry
    life, and no one leads a merry life for a farthing, so I will close
    the bargain with thee. But mind that thou bringest a good three hundred
    pounds with thee, for I trust not one that driveth so shrewd a bargain."

    "I will bring the money," said the Sheriff. "But what is thy name, good
    youth?"

    "Men call me Robert o' Locksley," quoth bold Robin.

    "Then, good Robert o' Locksley," quoth the Sheriff, "I will come this
    day to see thy horned beasts. But first my clerk shall draw up a paper
    in which thou shalt be bound to the sale, for thou gettest not my money
    without I get thy beasts in return."

    Then Robin Hood laughed again. "So be it," he said, smiting his palm
    upon the Sheriff's hand. "Truly my brothers will be thankful to thee for
    thy money."

    Thus the bargain was closed, but many of the butchers talked among
    themselves of the Sheriff, saying that it was but a scurvy trick to
    beguile a poor spendthrift youth in this way.

    The afternoon had come when the Sheriff mounted his horse and joined
    Robin Hood, who stood outside the gateway of the paved court waiting for
    him, for he had sold his horse and cart to a trader for two marks. Then
    they set forth upon their way, the Sheriff riding upon his horse and
    Robin running beside him. Thus they left Nottingham Town and traveled
    forward along the dusty highway, laughing and jesting together as though
    they had been old friends. But all the time the Sheriff said within
    himself, "Thy jest to me of Robin Hood shall cost thee dear, good
    fellow, even four hundred pounds, thou fool." For he thought he would
    make at least that much by his bargain.

    So they journeyed onward till they came within the verge of Sherwood
    Forest, when presently the Sheriff looked up and down and to the right
    and to the left of him, and then grew quiet and ceased his laughter.
    "Now," quoth he, "may Heaven and its saints preserve us this day from a
    rogue men call Robin Hood."

    Then Robin laughed aloud. "Nay," said he, "thou mayst set thy mind at
    rest, for well do I know Robin Hood and well do I know that thou art in
    no more danger from him this day than thou art from me."

    At this the Sheriff looked askance at Robin, saying to himself, "I like
    not that thou seemest so well acquainted with this bold outlaw, and I
    wish that I were well out of Sherwood Forest."

    But still they traveled deeper into the forest shades, and the deeper
    they went, the more quiet grew the Sheriff. At last they came to where
    the road took a sudden bend, and before them a herd of dun deer went
    tripping across the path. Then Robin Hood came close to the Sheriff and
    pointing his finger, he said, "These are my horned beasts, good Master
    Sheriff. How dost thou like them? Are they not fat and fair to see?"

    At this the Sheriff drew rein quickly. "Now fellow," quoth he, "I would
    I were well out of this forest, for I like not thy company. Go thou
    thine own path, good friend, and let me but go mine."

    But Robin only laughed and caught the Sheriff's bridle rein. "Nay,"
    cried he, "stay awhile, for I would thou shouldst see my brothers, who
    own these fair horned beasts with me." So saying, he clapped his bugle
    to his mouth and winded three merry notes, and presently up the path
    came leaping fivescore good stout yeomen with Little John at their head.

    "What wouldst thou have, good master?" quoth Little John.

    "Why," answered Robin, "dost thou not see that I have brought goodly
    company to feast with us today? Fye, for shame! Do you not see our good
    and worshipful master, the Sheriff of Nottingham? Take thou his bridle,
    Little John, for he has honored us today by coming to feast with us."

    Then all doffed their hats humbly, without smiling or seeming to be in
    jest, while Little John took the bridle rein and led the palfrey still
    deeper into the forest, all marching in order, with Robin Hood walking
    beside the Sheriff, hat in hand.

    All this time the Sheriff said never a word but only looked about him
    like one suddenly awakened from sleep; but when he found himself going
    within the very depths of Sherwood his heart sank within him, for he
    thought, "Surely my three hundred pounds will be taken from me, even
    if they take not my life itself, for I have plotted against their lives
    more than once." But all seemed humble and meek and not a word was said
    of danger, either to life or money.

    So at last they came to that part of Sherwood Forest where a noble oak
    spread its branches wide, and beneath it was a seat all made of moss, on
    which Robin sat down, placing the Sheriff at his right hand. "Now busk
    ye, my merry men all," quoth he, "and bring forth the best we have,
    both of meat and wine, for his worship the Sheriff hath feasted me in
    Nottingham Guild Hall today, and I would not have him go back empty."

    All this time nothing had been said of the Sheriff's money, so presently
    he began to pluck up heart. "For," said he to himself, "maybe Robin Hood
    hath forgotten all about it."

    Then, while beyond in the forest bright fires crackled and savory smells
    of sweetly roasting venison and fat capons filled the glade, and brown
    pasties warmed beside the blaze, did Robin Hood entertain the Sheriff
    right royally. First, several couples stood forth at quarterstaff, and
    so shrewd were they at the game, and so quickly did they give stroke
    and parry, that the Sheriff, who loved to watch all lusty sports of
    the kind, clapped his hands, forgetting where he was, and crying aloud,
    "Well struck! Well struck, thou fellow with the black beard!" little
    knowing that the man he called upon was the Tinker that tried to serve
    his warrant upon Robin Hood.

    Then several yeomen came forward and spread cloths upon the green grass,
    and placed a royal feast; while others still broached barrels of sack
    and Malmsey and good stout ale, and set them in jars upon the cloth,
    with drinking horns about them. Then all sat down and feasted and drank
    merrily together until the sun was low and the half-moon glimmered with
    a pale light betwixt the leaves of the trees overhead.

    Then the Sheriff arose and said, "I thank you all, good yeomen, for the
    merry entertainment ye have given me this day. Right courteously have ye
    used me, showing therein that ye have much respect for our glorious King
    and his deputy in brave Nottinghamshire. But the shadows grow long,
    and I must away before darkness comes, lest I lose myself within the
    forest."

    Then Robin Hood and all his merry men arose also, and Robin said to the
    Sheriff, "If thou must go, worshipful sir, go thou must; but thou hast
    forgotten one thing."

    "Nay, I forgot nought," said the Sheriff; yet all the same his heart
    sank within him.

    "But I say thou hast forgot something," quoth Robin. "We keep a merry
    inn here in the greenwood, but whoever becometh our guest must pay his
    reckoning."

    Then the Sheriff laughed, but the laugh was hollow. "Well, jolly boys,"
    quoth he, "we have had a merry time together today, and even if ye had
    not asked me, I would have given you a score of pounds for the sweet
    entertainment I have had."

    "Nay," quoth Robin seriously, "it would ill beseem us to treat Your
    Worship so meanly. By my faith, Sir Sheriff, I would be ashamed to show
    my face if I did not reckon the King's deputy at three hundred pounds.
    Is it not so, my merry men all?"

    Then "Ay!" cried all, in a loud voice.

    "Three hundred devils!" roared the Sheriff. "Think ye that your beggarly
    feast was worth three pounds, let alone three hundred?"

    "Nay," quoth Robin gravely. "Speak not so roundly, Your Worship. I
    do love thee for the sweet feast thou hast given me this day in merry
    Nottingham Town; but there be those here who love thee not so much. If
    thou wilt look down the cloth thou wilt see Will Stutely, in whose eyes
    thou hast no great favor; then two other stout fellows are there here
    that thou knowest not, that were wounded in a brawl nigh Nottingham
    Town, some time ago - thou wottest when; one of them was sore hurt in one
    arm, yet he hath got the use of it again. Good Sheriff, be advised by
    me; pay thy score without more ado, or maybe it may fare ill with thee."

    As he spoke the Sheriff's ruddy cheeks grew pale, and he said nothing
    more but looked upon the ground and gnawed his nether lip. Then slowly
    he drew forth his fat purse and threw it upon the cloth in front of him.

    "Now take the purse, Little John," quoth Robin Hood, "and see that the
    reckoning be right. We would not doubt our Sheriff, but he might not
    like it if he should find he had not paid his full score."

    Then Little John counted the money and found that the bag held three
    hundred pounds in silver and gold. But to the Sheriff it seemed as if
    every clink of the bright money was a drop of blood from his veins. And
    when he saw it all counted out in a heap of silver and gold, filling a
    wooden platter, he turned away and silently mounted his horse.

    "Never have we had so worshipful a guest before!" quoth Robin, "and, as
    the day waxeth late, I will send one of my young men to guide thee out
    of the forest depths."

    "Nay, Heaven forbid!" cried the Sheriff hastily. "I can find mine own
    way, good man, without aid."

    "Then I will put thee on the right track mine own self," quoth Robin,
    and, taking the Sheriff's horse by the bridle rein, he led him into the
    main forest path. Then, before he let him go, he said, "Now, fare thee
    well, good Sheriff, and when next thou thinkest to despoil some poor
    prodigal, remember thy feast in Sherwood Forest. 'Ne'er buy a horse,
    good friend, without first looking into its mouth,' as our good gaffer
    Swanthold says. And so, once more, fare thee well." Then he clapped
    his hand to the horse's back, and off went nag and Sheriff through the
    forest glades.

    Then bitterly the Sheriff rued the day that first he meddled with Robin
    Hood, for all men laughed at him and many ballads were sung by folk
    throughout the country, of how the Sheriff went to shear and came home
    shorn to the very quick. For thus men sometimes overreach themselves
    through greed and guile.




    Little John Goes to Nottingham Fair

    SPRING HAD GONE since the Sheriff's feast in Sherwood, and summer also,
    and the mellow month of October had come. All the air was cool and
    fresh; the harvests were gathered home, the young birds were full
    fledged, the hops were plucked, and apples were ripe. But though time
    had so smoothed things over that men no longer talked of the horned
    beasts that the Sheriff wished to buy, he was still sore about the
    matter and could not bear to hear Robin Hood's name spoken in his
    presence.

    With October had come the time for holding the great Fair which was
    celebrated every five years at Nottingham Town, to which folk came from
    far and near throughout the country. At such times archery was always
    the main sport of the day, for the Nottinghamshire yeomen were the best
    hand at the longbow in all merry England, but this year the Sheriff
    hesitated a long time before he issued proclamation of the Fair, fearing
    lest Robin Hood and his band might come to it. At first he had a great
    part of a mind not to proclaim the Fair, but second thought told him
    that men would laugh at him and say among themselves that he was afraid
    of Robin Hood, so he put that thought by. At last he fixed in his mind
    that he would offer such a prize as they would not care to shoot for.
    At such times it had been the custom to offer a half score of marks or
    a tun of ale, so this year he proclaimed that a prize of two fat steers
    should be given to the best bowman.

    When Robin Hood heard what had been proclaimed he was vexed, and said,
    "Now beshrew this Sheriff that he should offer such a prize that none
    but shepherd hinds will care to shoot for it! I would have loved nothing
    better than to have had another bout at merry Nottingham Town, but if I
    should win this prize nought would it pleasure or profit me."

    Then up spoke Little John: "Nay, but hearken, good master," said he,
    "only today Will Stutely, young David of Doncaster, and I were at the
    Sign of the Blue Boar, and there we heard all the news of this merry
    Fair, and also that the Sheriff hath offered this prize, that we of
    Sherwood might not care to come to the Fair; so, good master, if thou
    wilt, I would fain go and strive to win even this poor thing among the
    stout yeomen who will shoot at Nottingham Town."

    "Nay, Little John," quoth Robin, "thou art a sound stout fellow, yet
    thou lackest the cunning that good Stutely hath, and I would not have
    harm befall thee for all Nottinghamshire. Nevertheless, if thou wilt go,
    take some disguise lest there be those there who may know thee."

    "So be it, good master," quoth Little John, "yet all the disguise that I
    wish is a good suit of scarlet instead of this of Lincoln green. I will
    draw the cowl of my jacket about my head so that it will hide my brown
    hair and beard, and then, I trust, no one will know me."

    "It is much against my will," said Robin Hood, "ne'ertheless, if thou
    dost wish it, get thee gone, but bear thyself seemingly, Little John,
    for thou art mine own right-hand man and I could ill bear to have harm
    befall thee."

    So Little John clad himself all in scarlet and started off to the Fair
    at Nottingham Town.

    Right merry were these Fair days at Nottingham, when the green before
    the great town gate was dotted with booths standing in rows, with
    tents of many-colored canvas, hung about with streamers and garlands
    of flowers, and the folk came from all the countryside, both gentle
    and common. In some booths there was dancing to merry music, in others
    flowed ale and beer, and in others yet again sweet cakes and barley
    sugar were sold; and sport was going outside the booths also, where some
    minstrel sang ballads of the olden time, playing a second upon the harp,
    or where the wrestlers struggled with one another within the sawdust
    ring, but the people gathered most of all around a raised platform where
    stout fellows played at quarterstaff.

    So Little John came to the Fair. All scarlet were his hose and jerkin,
    and scarlet was his cowled cap, with a scarlet feather stuck in the side
    of it. Over his shoulders was slung a stout bow of yew, and across his
    back hung a quiver of good round arrows. Many turned to look after such
    a stout, tall fellow, for his shoulders were broader by a palm's-breadth
    than any that were there, and he stood a head taller than all the other
    men. The lasses, also, looked at him askance, thinking they had never
    seen a lustier youth.

    First of all he went to the booth where stout ale was sold and, standing
    aloft on a bench, he called to all that were near to come and drink
    with him. "Hey, sweet lads!" cried he "who will drink ale with a stout
    yeoman? Come, all! Come, all! Let us be merry, for the day is sweet and
    the ale is tingling. Come hither, good yeoman, and thou, and thou;
    for not a farthing shall one of you pay. Nay, turn hither, thou lusty
    beggar, and thou jolly tinker, for all shall be merry with me."

    Thus he shouted, and all crowded around, laughing, while the brown ale
    flowed; and they called Little John a brave fellow, each swearing that
    he loved him as his own brother; for when one has entertainment with
    nothing to pay, one loves the man that gives it to one.

    Then he strolled to the platform where they were at cudgel play, for he
    loved a bout at quarterstaff as he loved meat and drink; and here befell
    an adventure that was sung in ballads throughout the mid-country for
    many a day.

    One fellow there was that cracked crowns of everyone who threw cap into
    the ring. This was Eric o' Lincoln, of great renown, whose name had been
    sung in ballads throughout the countryside. When Little John reached the
    stand he found none fighting, but only bold Eric walking up and down the
    platform, swinging his staff and shouting lustily, "Now, who will
    come and strike a stroke for the lass he loves the best, with a good
    Lincolnshire yeoman? How now, lads? Step up! Step up! Or else the
    lasses' eyes are not bright hereabouts, or the blood of Nottingham youth
    is sluggish and cold. Lincoln against Nottingham, say I! For no one hath
    put foot upon the boards this day such as we of Lincoln call a cudgel
    player."

    At this, one would nudge another with his elbow, saying, "Go thou,
    Ned!" or "Go thou, Thomas!" but no lad cared to gain a cracked crown for
    nothing.

    Presently Eric saw where Little John stood among the others, a head and
    shoulders above them all, and he called to him loudly, "Halloa, thou
    long-legged fellow in scarlet! Broad are thy shoulders and thick thy
    head; is not thy lass fair enough for thee to take cudgel in hand for
    her sake? In truth, I believe that Nottingham men do turn to bone and
    sinew, for neither heart nor courage have they! Now, thou great lout,
    wilt thou not twirl staff for Nottingham?"

    "Ay," quoth Little John, "had I but mine own good staff here, it would
    pleasure me hugely to crack thy knave's pate, thou saucy braggart! I wot
    it would be well for thee an thy cock's comb were cut!" Thus he spoke,
    slowly at first, for he was slow to move; but his wrath gathered headway
    like a great stone rolling down a hill, so that at the end he was full
    of anger.

    Then Eric o' Lincoln laughed aloud. "Well spoken for one who fears to
    meet me fairly, man to man," said he. "Saucy art thou thine own self,
    and if thou puttest foot upon these boards, I will make thy saucy tongue
    rattle within thy teeth!"

    "Now," quoth Little John, "is there never a man here that will lend me
    a good stout staff till I try the mettle of yon fellow?" At this, half a
    score reached him their staves, and he took the stoutest and heaviest of
    them all. Then, looking up and down the cudgel, he said, "Now, I have in
    my hand but a splint of wood - a barley straw, as it were - yet I trow it
    will have to serve me, so here goeth." Thereupon he cast the cudgel
    upon the stand and, leaping lightly after it, snatched it up in his hand
    again.

    Then each man stood in his place and measured the other with fell looks
    until he that directed the sport cried, "Play!" At this they stepped
    forth, each grasping his staff tightly in the middle. Then those that
    stood around saw the stoutest game of quarterstaff that e'er Nottingham
    Town beheld. At first Eric o' Lincoln thought that he would gain an easy
    advantage, so he came forth as if he would say, "Watch, good people, how
    that I carve you this cockerel right speedily;" but he presently found
    it to be no such speedy matter. Right deftly he struck, and with great
    skill of fence, but he had found his match in Little John. Once, twice,
    thrice, he struck, and three times Little John turned the blows to the
    left hand and to the right. Then quickly and with a dainty backhanded
    blow, he rapped Eric beneath his guard so shrewdly that it made his head
    ring again. Then Eric stepped back to gather his wits, while a great
    shout went up and all were glad that Nottingham had cracked Lincoln's
    crown; and thus ended the first bout of the game.

    Then presently the director of the sport cried, "Play!" and they came
    together again; but now Eric played warily, for he found his man was of
    right good mettle, and also he had no sweet memory of the blow that he
    had got; so this bout neither Little John nor the Lincoln man caught
    a stroke within his guard. Then, after a while, they parted again, and
    this made the second bout.

    Then for the third time they came together, and at first Eric strove to
    be wary, as he had been before; but, growing mad at finding himself so
    foiled, he lost his wits and began to rain blows so fiercely and so fast
    that they rattled like hail on penthouse roof; but, in spite of all, he
    did not reach within Little John's guard. Then at last Little John saw
    his chance and seized it right cleverly. Once more, with a quick blow,
    he rapped Eric beside the head, and ere he could regain himself, Little
    John slipped his right hand down to his left and, with a swinging blow,
    smote the other so sorely upon the crown that down he fell as though he
    would never move again.

    Then the people shouted so loud that folk came running from all about to
    see what was the ado; while Little John leaped down from the stand and
    gave the staff back to him that had lent it to him. And thus ended the
    famous bout between Little John and Eric o' Lincoln of great renown.

    But now the time had come when those who were to shoot with the longbow
    were to take their places, so the people began flocking to the butts
    where the shooting was to be. Near the target, in a good place, sat the
    Sheriff upon a raised dais, with many gentlefolk around him. When the
    archers had taken their places, the herald came forward and proclaimed
    the rules of the game, and how each should shoot three shots, and to him
    that should shoot the best the prize of two fat steers was to belong.
    A score of brave shots were gathered there, and among them some of the
    keenest hands at the longbow in Lincoln and Nottinghamshire; and among
    them Little John stood taller than all the rest. "Who is yon stranger
    clad all in scarlet?" said some, and others answered, "It is he that
    hath but now so soundly cracked the crown of Eric o' Lincoln." Thus
    the people talked among themselves, until at last it reached even the
    Sheriff's ears.

    And now each man stepped forward and shot in turn; but though each shot
    well, Little John was the best of all, for three times he struck the
    clout, and once only the length of a barleycorn from the center. "Hey
    for the tall archer!" shouted the crowd, and some among them shouted,
    "Hey for Reynold Greenleaf!" for this was the name that Little John had
    called himself that day.

    Then the Sheriff stepped down from the raised seat and came to where
    the archers stood, while all doffed their caps that saw him coming. He
    looked keenly at Little John but did not know him, though he said, after
    a while, "How now, good fellow, methinks there is that about thy face
    that I have seen erewhile."

    "Mayhap it may be so," quoth Little John, "for often have I seen Your
    Worship." And, as he spoke, he looked steadily into the Sheriff's eyes
    so that the latter did not suspect who he was.

    "A brave blade art thou, good friend," said the Sheriff, "and I hear
    that thou hast well upheld the skill of Nottinghamshire against that of
    Lincoln this day. What may be thy name, good fellow?"

    "Men do call me Reynold Greenleaf, Your Worship," said Little John; and
    the old ballad that tells of this, adds, "So, in truth, was he a green
    leaf, but of what manner of tree the Sheriff wotted not."

    "Now, Reynold Greenleaf," quoth the Sheriff, "thou art the fairest hand
    at the longbow that mine eyes ever beheld, next to that false knave,
    Robin Hood, from whose wiles Heaven forfend me! Wilt thou join my
    service, good fellow? Thou shalt be paid right well, for three suits of
    clothes shalt thou have a year, with good food and as much ale as
    thou canst drink; and, besides this, I will pay thee forty marks each
    Michaelmastide."

    "Then here stand I a free man, and right gladly will I enter thy
    household," said Little John, for he thought he might find some merry
    jest, should he enter the Sheriff's service.

    "Fairly hast thou won the fat steers," said the Sheriff, "and hereunto
    I will add a butt of good March beer, for joy of having gotten such a
    man; for, I wot, thou shootest as fair a shaft as Robin Hood himself."

    "Then," said Little John, "for joy of having gotten myself into thy
    service, I will give fat steers and brown ale to all these good folk, to
    make them merry withal." At this arose a great shout, many casting their
    caps aloft, for joy of the gift.

    Then some built great fires and roasted the steers, and others broached
    the butt of ale, with which all made themselves merry. Then, when they
    had eaten and drunk as much as they could, and when the day faded and
    the great moon arose, all red and round, over the spires and towers of
    Nottingham Town, they joined hands and danced around the fires, to the
    music of bagpipes and harps. But long before this merrymaking had begun,
    the Sheriff and his new servant Reynold Greenleaf were in the Castle of
    Nottingham.




    How Little John Lived at the Sheriff's

    THUS LITTLE JOHN entered into the Sheriff's service and found the life
    he led there easy enough, for the Sheriff made him his right-hand man
    and held him in great favor. He sat nigh the Sheriff at meat, and he ran
    beside his horse when he went a-hunting; so that, what with hunting and
    hawking a little, and eating rich dishes and drinking good sack, and
    sleeping until late hours in the morning, he grew as fat as a stall-fed
    ox. Thus things floated easily along with the tide, until one day when
    the Sheriff went a-hunting, there happened that which broke the smooth
    surface of things.

    This morning the Sheriff and many of his men set forth to meet certain
    lords, to go a-hunting. He looked all about him for his good man,
    Reynold Greenleaf, but, not finding him, was vexed, for he wished to
    show Little John's skill to his noble friends. As for Little John, he
    lay abed, snoring lustily, till the sun was high in the heavens. At
    last he opened his eyes and looked about him but did not move to arise.
    Brightly shone the sun in at the window, and all the air was sweet with
    the scent of woodbine that hung in sprays about the wall without, for
    the cold winter was past and spring was come again, and Little John lay
    still, thinking how sweet was everything on this fair morn. Just then he
    heard, faint and far away, a distant bugle note sounding thin and clear.
    The sound was small, but, like a little pebble dropped into a glassy
    fountain, it broke all the smooth surface of his thoughts, until his
    whole soul was filled with disturbance. His spirit seemed to awaken
    from its sluggishness, and his memory brought back to him all the merry
    greenwood life - how the birds were singing blithely there this bright
    morning, and how his loved companions and friends were feasting and
    making merry, or perhaps talking of him with sober speech; for when
    he first entered the Sheriff's service he did so in jest; but the
    hearthstone was warm during the winter, and the fare was full, and so
    he had abided, putting off from day to day his going back to Sherwood,
    until six long months had passed. But now he thought of his good master
    and of Will Stutely, whom he loved better than anyone in all the world,
    and of young David of Doncaster, whom he had trained so well in all
    manly sports, till there came over his heart a great and bitter longing
    for them all, so that his eyes filled with tears. Then he said aloud,
    "Here I grow fat like a stall-fed ox and all my manliness departeth from
    me while I become a sluggard and dolt. But I will arouse me and go back
    to mine own dear friends once more, and never will I leave them again
    till life doth leave my lips." So saying, he leaped from bed, for he
    hated his sluggishness now.

    When he came downstairs he saw the Steward standing near the pantry
    door - a great, fat man, with a huge bundle of keys hanging to his
    girdle. Then Little John said, "Ho, Master Steward, a hungry man am I,
    for nought have I had for all this blessed morn. Therefore, give me to
    eat."

    Then the Steward looked grimly at him and rattled the keys in his
    girdle, for he hated Little John because he had found favor with the
    Sheriff. "So, Master Reynold Greenleaf, thou art anhungered, art thou?"
    quoth he. "But, fair youth, if thou livest long enough, thou wilt find
    that he who getteth overmuch sleep for an idle head goeth with an empty
    stomach. For what sayeth the old saw, Master Greenleaf? Is it not 'The
    late fowl findeth but ill faring'?"

    "Now, thou great purse of fat!" cried Little John, "I ask thee not for
    fool's wisdom, but for bread and meat. Who art thou, that thou shouldst
    deny me to eat? By Saint Dunstan, thou hadst best tell me where my
    breakfast is, if thou wouldst save broken bones!"

    "Thy breakfast, Master Fireblaze, is in the pantry," answered the
    Steward.

    "Then fetch it hither!" cried Little John, who waxed angry by this time.

    "Go thou and fetch it thine own self," quoth the Steward. "Am I thy
    slave, to fetch and carry for thee?"

    "I say, go thou, bring it me!"

    "I say, go thou, fetch it for thyself!"

    "Ay, marry, that will I, right quickly!" quoth Little John in a rage.
    And, so saying, he strode to the pantry and tried to open the door but
    found it locked, whereat the Steward laughed and rattled his keys. Then
    the wrath of Little John boiled over, and, lifting his clenched fist, he
    smote the pantry door, bursting out three panels and making so large an
    opening that he could easily stoop and walk through it.

    When the Steward saw what was done, he waxed mad with rage; and, as
    Little John stooped to look within the pantry, he seized him from behind
    by the nape of the neck, pinching him sorely and smiting him over the
    head with his keys till the yeoman's ears rang again. At this Little
    John turned upon the Steward and smote him such a buffet that the fat
    man fell to the floor and lay there as though he would never move again.
    "There," quoth Little John, "think well of that stroke and never keep a
    good breakfast from a hungry man again."

    So saying, he crept into the pantry and looked about him to see if he
    could find something to appease his hunger. He saw a great venison pasty
    and two roasted capons, beside which was a platter of plover's eggs;
    moreover, there was a flask of sack and one of canary - a sweet sight
    to a hungry man. These he took down from the shelves and placed upon a
    sideboard, and prepared to make himself merry.

    Now the Cook, in the kitchen across the courtyard, heard the loud
    talking between Little John and the Steward, and also the blow that
    Little John struck the other, so he came running across the court and up
    the stairway to where the Steward's pantry was, bearing in his hands the
    spit with the roast still upon it. Meanwhile the Steward had gathered
    his wits about him and risen to his feet, so that when the Cook came
    to the Steward's pantry he saw him glowering through the broken door at
    Little John, who was making ready for a good repast, as one dog glowers
    at another that has a bone. When the Steward saw the Cook, he came to
    him, and, putting one arm over his shoulder, "Alas, sweet friend!" quoth
    he - for the Cook was a tall, stout man - "seest thou what that vile knave
    Reynold Greenleaf hath done? He hath broken in upon our master's goods,
    and hath smitten me a buffet upon the ear, so that I thought I was dead.
    Good Cook, I love thee well, and thou shalt have a good pottle of our
    master's best wine every day, for thou art an old and faithful servant.
    Also, good Cook, I have ten shillings that I mean to give as a gift
    to thee. But hatest thou not to see a vile upstart like this Reynold
    Greenleaf taking it upon him so bravely?"

    "Ay, marry, that do I," quoth the Cook boldly, for he liked the Steward
    because of his talk of the wine and of the ten shillings. "Get thee gone
    straightway to thy room, and I will bring out this knave by his ears."
    So saying, he laid aside his spit and drew the sword that hung by his
    side; whereupon the Steward left as quickly as he could, for he hated
    the sight of naked steel.

    Then the Cook walked straightway to the broken pantry door, through
    which he saw Little John tucking a napkin beneath his chin and preparing
    to make himself merry.

    "Why, how now, Reynold Greenleaf?" said the Cook, "thou art no better
    than a thief, I wot. Come thou straight forth, man, or I will carve thee
    as I would carve a sucking pig."

    "Nay, good Cook, bear thou thyself more seemingly, or else I will come
    forth to thy dole. At most times I am as a yearling lamb, but when one
    cometh between me and my meat, I am a raging lion, as it were."

    "Lion or no lion," quoth the valorous Cook, "come thou straight forth,
    else thou art a coward heart as well as a knavish thief."

    "Ha!" cried Little John, "coward's name have I never had; so, look to
    thyself, good Cook, for I come forth straight, the roaring lion I did
    speak of but now."

    Then he, too, drew his sword and came out of the pantry; then, putting
    themselves into position, they came slowly together, with grim and angry
    looks; but suddenly Little John lowered his point. "Hold, good Cook!"
    said he. "Now, I bethink me it were ill of us to fight with good
    victuals standing so nigh, and such a feast as would befit two stout
    fellows such as we are. Marry, good friend, I think we should enjoy this
    fair feast ere we fight. What sayest thou, jolly Cook?"

    At this speech the Cook looked up and down, scratching his head in
    doubt, for he loved good feasting. At last he drew a long breath and
    said to Little John, "Well, good friend, I like thy plan right well; so,
    pretty boy, say I, let us feast, with all my heart, for one of us may
    sup in Paradise before nightfall."

    So each thrust his sword back into the scabbard and entered the pantry.
    Then, after they had seated themselves, Little John drew his dagger and
    thrust it into the pie. "A hungry man must be fed," quoth he, "so,
    sweet chuck, I help myself without leave." But the Cook did not lag far
    behind, for straightway his hands also were deeply thrust within the
    goodly pasty. After this, neither of them spoke further, but used their
    teeth to better purpose. But though neither spoke, they looked at one
    another, each thinking within himself that he had never seen a more
    lusty fellow than the one across the board.

    At last, after a long time had passed, the Cook drew a full, deep
    breath, as though of much regret, and wiped his hands upon the napkin,
    for he could eat no more. Little John, also, had enough, for he pushed
    the pasty aside, as though he would say, "I want thee by me no more,
    good friend." Then he took the pottle of sack, and said he, "Now,
    good fellow, I swear by all that is bright, that thou art the stoutest
    companion at eating that ever I had. Lo! I drink thy health." So saying,
    he clapped the flask to his lips and cast his eyes aloft, while the good
    wine flooded his throat. Then he passed the pottle to the Cook, who also
    said, "Lo, I drink thy health, sweet fellow!" Nor was he behind Little
    John in drinking any more than in eating.

    "Now," quoth Little John, "thy voice is right round and sweet, jolly
    lad. I doubt not thou canst sing a ballad most blithely; canst thou
    not?"

    "Truly, I have trolled one now and then," quoth the Cook, "yet I would
    not sing alone."

    "Nay, truly," said Little John, "that were but ill courtesy. Strike up
    thy ditty, and I will afterward sing one to match it, if I can.

    "So be it, pretty boy," quoth the Cook. "And hast thou e'er heard the
    song of the Deserted Shepherdess?"

    "Truly, I know not," answered Little John, "but sing thou and let me
    hear."

    Then the Cook took another draught from the pottle, and, clearing his
    throat, sang right sweetly:


    THE SONG OF THE DESERTED SHEPHERDESS

         "_In Lententime, when leaves wax green,
         And pretty birds begin to mate,
         When lark cloth sing, and thrush, I ween,
         And stockdove cooeth soon and late,
         Fair Phillis sat beside a stone,
         And thus I heard her make her moan:
         'O willow, willow, willow, willow!
         I'll take me of thy branches fair
         And twine a wreath to deck my hair.

         "'The thrush hath taken him a she,
         The robin, too, and eke the dove;
         My Robin hath deserted me,
         And left me for another love.
         So here, by brookside, all alone,
         I sit me down and make my moan.
         O willow, willow, willow, willow!
         I'll take me of thy branches fair
         And twine a wreath to deck my hair.'

         "But ne'er came herring from the sea,
         But good as he were in the tide;
         Young Corydon came o'er the lea,
         And sat him Phillis down beside.
         So, presently, she changed her tone,
         And 'gan to cease her from her moan,
         'O willow, willow, willow, willow!
         Thou mayst e'en keep thy garlands fair,
         I want them not to deck my hair_.'"

    "Now, by my faith," cried Little John, "that same is a right good song,
    and hath truth in it, also."

    "Glad am I thou likest it, sweet lad," said the Cook. "Now sing thou one
    also, for ne'er should a man be merry alone, or sing and list not."

    "Then I will sing thee a song of a right good knight of Arthur's court,
    and how he cured his heart's wound without running upon the dart again,
    as did thy Phillis; for I wot she did but cure one smart by giving
    herself another. So, list thou while I sing:"


    THE GOOD KNIGHT AND HIS LOVE

         "_When Arthur, King, did rule this land,
         A goodly king was he,
         And had he of stout knights a band
         Of merry company.

         "Among them all, both great and small,
         A good stout knight was there,
         A lusty childe, and eke a tall,
         That loved a lady fair.

         "But nought would she to do with he,
         But turned her face away;
         So gat he gone to far countrye,
         And left that lady gay.

         "There all alone he made his moan,
         And eke did sob and sigh,
         And weep till it would move a stone,
         And he was like to die.

         "But still his heart did feel the smart,
         And eke the dire distress,
         And rather grew his pain more sharp
         As grew his body less.

         "Then gat he back where was good sack
         And merry com panye,
         And soon did cease to cry 'Alack!'
         When blithe and gay was he.

         "From which I hold, and feel full bold
         To say, and eke believe,
         That gin the belly go not cold
         The heart will cease to grieve_."

    "Now, by my faith," cried the Cook, as he rattled the pottle against
    the sideboard, "I like that same song hugely, and eke the motive of it,
    which lieth like a sweet kernel in a hazelnut."

    "Now thou art a man of shrewd opinions," quoth Little John, "and I love
    thee truly as thou wert my brother."

    "And I love thee, too. But the day draweth on, and I have my cooking to
    do ere our master cometh home; so let us e'en go and settle this brave
    fight we have in hand."

    "Ay, marry," quoth Little John, "and that right speedily. Never have I
    been more laggard in fighting than in eating and drinking. So come thou
    straight forth into the passageway, where there is good room to swing a
    sword, and I will try to serve thee."

    Then they both stepped forth into the broad passage that led to the
    Steward's pantry, where each man drew his sword again and without more
    ado fell upon the other as though he would hew his fellow limb from
    limb. Then their swords clashed upon one another with great din, and
    sparks flew from each blow in showers. So they fought up and down the
    hall for an hour and more, neither striking the other a blow, though
    they strove their best to do so; for both were skillful at the fence;
    so nothing came of all their labor. Ever and anon they rested, panting;
    then, after getting their wind, at it they would go again more fiercely
    than ever. At last Little John cried aloud, "Hold, good Cook!" whereupon
    each rested upon his sword, panting.

    "Now will I make my vow," quoth Little John, "thou art the very best
    swordsman that ever mine eyes beheld. Truly, I had thought to carve thee
    ere now."

    "And I had thought to do the same by thee," quoth the Cook, "but I have
    missed the mark somehow."

    "Now I have been thinking within myself," quoth Little John, "what we
    are fighting for; but albeit I do not rightly know."

    "Why, no more do I," said the Cook. "I bear no love for that pursy
    Steward, but I thought that we had engaged to fight with one another and
    that it must be done."

    "Now," quoth Little John, "it doth seem to me that instead of striving
    to cut one another's throats, it were better for us to be boon
    companions. What sayst thou, jolly Cook, wilt thou go with me to
    Sherwood Forest and join with Robin Hood's band? Thou shalt live a merry
    life within the woodlands, and sevenscore good companions shalt thou
    have, one of whom is mine own self. Thou shalt have three suits of
    Lincoln green each year, and forty marks in pay."

    "Now, thou art a man after mine own heart!" cried the Cook right
    heartily, "and, as thou speakest of it, that is the very service for
    me. I will go with thee, and that right gladly. Give me thy palm, sweet
    fellow, and I will be thine own companion from henceforth. What may be
    thy name, lad?"

    "Men do call me Little John, good fellow."

    "How? And art thou indeed Little John, and Robin Hood's own right-hand
    man? Many a time and oft I heard of thee, but never did I hope to set
    eyes upon thee. And thou art indeed the famous Little John!" And the
    Cook seemed lost in amazement, and looked upon his companion with open
    eyes.

    "I am Little John, indeed, and I will bring to Robin Hood this day a
    right stout fellow to join his merry band. But ere we go, good friend,
    it seemeth to me to be a vast pity that, as we have had so much of the
    Sheriff's food, we should not also carry off some of his silver plate to
    Robin Hood, as a present from his worship."

    "Ay, marry is it," said the Cook. And so they began hunting about, and
    took as much silver as they could lay hands upon, clapping it into
    a bag, and when they had filled the sack they set forth to Sherwood
    Forest.

    Plunging into the woods, they came at last to the greenwood tree, where
    they found Robin Hood and threescore of his merry men lying upon the
    fresh green grass. When Robin and his men saw who it was that came, they
    leaped to their feet. "Now welcome!" cried Robin Hood. "Now welcome,
    Little John! For long hath it been since we have heard from thee, though
    we all knew that thou hadst joined the Sheriff's service. And how hast
    thou fared all these long days?"

    "Right merrily have I lived at the Lord Sheriff's," answered Little
    John, "and I have come straight thence. See, good master! I have brought
    thee his cook, and even his silver plate." Thereupon he told Robin Hood
    and his merry men that were there, all that had befallen him since he
    had left them to go to the Fair at Nottingham Town. Then all shouted
    with laughter, except Robin Hood; but he looked grave.

    "Nay, Little John," said he, "thou art a brave blade and a trusty
    fellow. I am glad thou hast brought thyself back to us, and with such a
    good companion as the Cook, whom we all welcome to Sherwood. But I like
    not so well that thou hast stolen the Sheriff's plate like some paltry
    thief. The Sheriff hath been punished by us, and hath lost three hundred
    pounds, even as he sought to despoil another; but he hath done nought
    that we should steal his household plate from him."

    Though Little John was vexed with this, he strove to pass it off with a
    jest. "Nay, good master," quoth he, "if thou thinkest the Sheriff gave
    us not the plate, I will fetch him, that he may tell us with his own
    lips he giveth it all to us." So saying he leaped to his feet, and was
    gone before Robin could call him back.

    Little John ran for full five miles till he came to where the Sheriff of
    Nottingham and a gay company were hunting near the forest. When Little
    John came to the Sheriff he doffed his cap and bent his knee. "God save
    thee, good master," quoth he.

    "Why, Reynold Greenleaf!" cried the Sheriff, "whence comest thou and
    where hast thou been?"

    "I have been in the forest," answered Little John, speaking amazedly,
    "and there I saw a sight such as ne'er before man's eyes beheld! Yonder
    I saw a young hart all in green from top to toe, and about him was a
    herd of threescore deer, and they, too, were all of green from head to
    foot. Yet I dared not shoot, good master, for fear lest they should slay
    me."

    "Why, how now, Reynold Greenleaf," cried the Sheriff, "art thou dreaming
    or art thou mad, that thou dost bring me such, a tale?"

    "Nay, I am not dreaming nor am I mad," said Little John, "and if thou
    wilt come with me, I will show thee this fair sight, for I have seen
    it with mine own eyes. But thou must come alone, good master, lest the
    others frighten them and they get away."

    So the party all rode forward, and Little John led them downward into
    the forest.

    "Now, good master," quoth he at last, "we are nigh where I saw this
    herd."

    Then the Sheriff descended from his horse and bade them wait for him
    until he should return; and Little John led him forward through a close
    copse until suddenly they came to a great open glade, at the end of
    which Robin Hood sat beneath the shade of the great oak tree, with his
    merry men all about him. "See, good Master Sheriff," quoth Little John,
    "yonder is the hart of which I spake to thee."

    At this the Sheriff turned to Little John and said bitterly, "Long ago
    I thought I remembered thy face, but now I know thee. Woe betide thee,
    Little John, for thou hast betrayed me this day."

    In the meantime Robin Hood had come to them. "Now welcome, Master
    Sheriff," said he. "Hast thou come today to take another feast with me?"

    "Nay, Heaven forbid!" said the Sheriff in tones of deep earnest. "I care
    for no feast and have no hunger today."

    "Nevertheless," quoth Robin, "if thou hast no hunger, maybe thou hast
    thirst, and well I know thou wilt take a cup of sack with me. But I am
    grieved that thou wilt not feast with me, for thou couldst have victuals
    to thy liking, for there stands thy Cook."

    Then he led the Sheriff, willy-nilly, to the seat he knew so well
    beneath the greenwood tree.

    "Ho, lads!" cried Robin, "fill our good friend the Sheriff a right
    brimming cup of sack and fetch it hither, for he is faint and weary."

    Then one of the band brought the Sheriff a cup of sack, bowing low as he
    handed it to him; but the Sheriff could not touch the wine, for he saw
    it served in one of his own silver flagons, on one of his own silver
    plates.

    "How now," quoth Robin, "dost thou not like our new silver service? We
    have gotten a bag of it this day." So saying, he held up the sack of
    silver that Little John and the Cook had brought with them.

    Then the Sheriff's heart was bitter within him; but, not daring to say
    anything, he only gazed upon the ground. Robin looked keenly at him for
    a time before he spoke again. Then said he, "Now, Master Sheriff, the
    last time thou camest to Sherwood Forest thou didst come seeking to
    despoil a poor spendthrift, and thou wert despoiled thine own self;
    but now thou comest seeking to do no harm, nor do I know that thou hast
    despoiled any man. I take my tithes from fat priests and lordly squires,
    to help those that they despoil and to raise up those that they bow
    down; but I know not that thou hast tenants of thine own whom thou hast
    wronged in any way. Therefore, take thou thine own again, nor will I
    dispossess thee today of so much as one farthing. Come with me, and I
    will lead thee from the forest back to thine own party again."

    Then, slinging the bag upon his shoulder, he turned away, the Sheriff
    following him, all too perplexed in mind to speak. So they went forward
    until they came to within a furlong of the spot where the Sheriff's
    companions were waiting for him. Then Robin Hood gave the sack of silver
    back to the Sheriff. "Take thou thine own again," he said, "and hearken
    to me, good Sheriff, take thou a piece of advice with it. Try thy
    servants well ere thou dost engage them again so readily." Then,
    turning, he left the other standing bewildered, with the sack in his
    hands.

    The company that waited for the Sheriff were all amazed to see him come
    out of the forest bearing a heavy sack upon his shoulders; but though
    they questioned him, he answered never a word, acting like one who walks
    in a dream. Without a word, he placed the bag across his nag's back and
    then, mounting, rode away, all following him; but all the time there
    was a great turmoil of thoughts within his head, tumbling one over the
    other. And thus ends the merry tale of Little John and how he entered
    the Sheriff's service.




    Little John and the Tanner of Blyth

    ONE FINE DAY, not long after Little John had left abiding with the
    Sheriff and had come back, with his worship's cook, to the merry
    greenwood, as has just been told, Robin Hood and a few chosen fellows of
    his band lay upon the soft sward beneath the greenwood tree where they
    dwelled. The day was warm and sultry, so that while most of the band
    were scattered through the forest upon this mission and upon that, these
    few stout fellows lay lazily beneath the shade of the tree, in the soft
    afternoon, passing jests among themselves and telling merry stories,
    with laughter and mirth.

    All the air was laden with the bitter fragrance of the May, and all
    the bosky shades of the woodlands beyond rang with the sweet song of
    birds - the throstle cock, the cuckoo, and the wood pigeon - and with the
    song of birds mingled the cool sound of the gurgling brook that leaped
    out of the forest shades, and ran fretting amid its rough, gray stones
    across the sunlit open glade before the trysting tree. And a fair sight
    was that halfscore of tall, stout yeomen, all clad in Lincoln green,
    lying beneath the broad-spreading branches of the great oak tree, amid
    the quivering leaves of which the sunlight shivered and fell in dancing
    patches upon the grass.

    Suddenly Robin Hood smote his knee.

    "By Saint Dunstan," quoth he, "I had nigh forgot that quarter-day cometh
    on apace, and yet no cloth of Lincoln green in all our store. It must be
    looked to, and that in quick season. Come, busk thee, Little John! Stir
    those lazy bones of thine, for thou must get thee straightway to our
    good gossip, the draper Hugh Longshanks of Ancaster. Bid him send us
    straightway twenty-score yards of fair cloth of Lincoln green; and mayhap
    the journey may take some of the fat from off thy bones, that thou hast
    gotten from lazy living at our dear Sheriff's."

    "Nay," muttered Little John (for he had heard so much upon this score
    that he was sore upon the point), "nay, truly, mayhap I have more flesh
    upon my joints than I once had, yet, flesh or no flesh, I doubt not that
    I could still hold my place and footing upon a narrow bridge against
    e'er a yeoman in Sherwood, or Nottinghamshire, for the matter of that,
    even though he had no more fat about his bones than thou hast, good
    master."

    At this reply a great shout of laughter went up, and all looked at Robin
    Hood, for each man knew that Little John spake of a certain fight that
    happened between their master and himself, through which they first
    became acquainted.

    "Nay," quoth Robin Hood, laughing louder than all. "Heaven forbid that
    I should doubt thee, for I care for no taste of thy staff myself, Little
    John. I must needs own that there are those of my band can handle a
    seven-foot staff more deftly than I; yet no man in all Nottinghamshire
    can draw gray goose shaft with my fingers. Nevertheless, a journey to
    Ancaster may not be ill for thee; so go thou, as I bid, and thou hadst
    best go this very evening, for since thou hast abided at the Sheriff's
    many know thy face, and if thou goest in broad daylight, thou mayst get
    thyself into a coil with some of his worship's men-at-arms. Bide thou
    here till I bring thee money to pay our good Hugh. I warrant he hath no
    better customers in all Nottinghamshire than we." So saying, Robin left
    them and entered the forest.

    Not far from the trysting tree was a great rock in which a chamber
    had been hewn, the entrance being barred by a massive oaken door two
    palms'-breadth in thickness, studded about with spikes, and fastened
    with a great padlock. This was the treasure house of the band, and
    thither Robin Hood went and, unlocking the door, entered the chamber,
    from which he brought forth a bag of gold which he gave to Little John,
    to pay Hugh Longshanks withal, for the cloth of Lincoln green.

    Then up got Little John, and, taking the bag of gold, which he thrust
    into his bosom, he strapped a girdle about his loins, took a stout
    pikestaff full seven feet long in his hand, and set forth upon his
    journey.

    So he strode whistling along the leafy forest path that led to Fosse
    Way, turning neither to the right hand nor the left, until at last he
    came to where the path branched, leading on the one hand onward to Fosse
    Way, and on the other, as well Little John knew, to the merry Blue
    Boar Inn. Here Little John suddenly ceased whistling and stopped in
    the middle of the path. First he looked up and then he looked down, and
    then, tilting his cap over one eye, he slowly scratched the back part of
    his head. For thus it was: at the sight of these two roads, two voices
    began to alarum within him, the one crying, "There lies the road to
    the Blue Boar Inn, a can of brown October, and a merry night with sweet
    companions such as thou mayst find there;" the other, "There lies the
    way to Ancaster and the duty thou art sent upon." Now the first of these
    two voices was far the louder, for Little John had grown passing fond
    of good living through abiding at the Sheriff's house; so, presently,
    looking up into the blue sky, across which bright clouds were sailing
    like silver boats, and swallows skimming in circling flight, quoth he,
    "I fear me it will rain this evening, so I'll e'en stop at the Blue Boar
    till it passes by, for I know my good master would not have me wet to
    the skin." So, without more ado, off he strode down the path that lay
    the way of his likings. Now there was no sign of any foul weather, but
    when one wishes to do a thing, as Little John did, one finds no lack of
    reasons for the doing.

    Four merry wags were at the Blue Boar Inn; a butcher, a beggar, and two
    barefoot friars. Little John heard them singing from afar, as he walked
    through the hush of the mellow twilight that was now falling over hill
    and dale. Right glad were they to welcome such a merry blade as Little
    John. Fresh cans of ale were brought, and with jest and song and merry
    tales the hours slipped away on fleeting wings. None thought of time or
    tide till the night was so far gone that Little John put by the thought
    of setting forth upon his journey again that night, and so bided at the
    Blue Boar Inn until the morrow.

    Now it was an ill piece of luck for Little John that he left his duty
    for his pleasure, and he paid a great score for it, as we are all apt to
    do in the same case, as you shall see.

    Up he rose at the dawn of the next day, and, taking his stout pikestaff
    in his hand, he set forth upon his journey once more, as though he would
    make up for lost time.

    In the good town of Blyth there lived a stout tanner, celebrated far
    and near for feats of strength and many tough bouts at wrestling and the
    quarterstaff. For five years he had held the mid-country champion belt
    for wrestling, till the great Adam o' Lincoln cast him in the ring and
    broke one of his ribs; but at quarterstaff he had never yet met his
    match in all the country about. Besides all this, he dearly loved the
    longbow, and a sly jaunt in the forest when the moon was full and the
    dun deer in season; so that the King's rangers kept a shrewd eye upon
    him and his doings, for Arthur a Bland's house was apt to have aplenty
    of meat in it that was more like venison than the law allowed.

    Now Arthur had been to Nottingham Town the day before Little John set
    forth on his errand, there to sell a halfscore of tanned cowhides. At
    the dawn of the same day that Little John left the inn, he started from
    Nottingham, homeward for Blyth. His way led, all in the dewy morn, past
    the verge of Sherwood Forest, where the birds were welcoming the lovely
    day with a great and merry jubilee. Across the Tanner's shoulders was
    slung his stout quarterstaff, ever near enough to him to be gripped
    quickly, and on his head was a cap of doubled cowhide, so tough that it
    could hardly be cloven even by a broadsword.

    "Now," quoth Arthur a Bland to himself, when he had come to that part of
    the road that cut through a corner of the forest, "no doubt at this time
    of year the dun deer are coming from the forest depths nigher to the
    open meadow lands. Mayhap I may chance to catch a sight of the dainty
    brown darlings thus early in the morn." For there was nothing he loved
    better than to look upon a tripping herd of deer, even when he could
    not tickle their ribs with a clothyard shaft. Accordingly, quitting the
    path, he went peeping this way and that through the underbrush, spying
    now here and now there, with all the wiles of a master of woodcraft, and
    of one who had more than once donned a doublet of Lincoln green.

    Now as Little John stepped blithely along, thinking of nothing but of
    such things as the sweetness of the hawthorn buds that bedecked the
    hedgerows, or gazing upward at the lark, that, springing from the dewy
    grass, hung aloft on quivering wings in the yellow sunlight, pouring
    forth its song that fell like a falling star from the sky, his luck led
    him away from the highway, not far from the spot where Arthur a Bland
    was peeping this way and that through the leaves of the thickets.
    Hearing a rustling of the branches, Little John stopped and presently
    caught sight of the brown cowhide cap of the Tanner moving among the
    bushes.

    "I do much wonder," quoth Little John to himself, "what yon knave is
    after, that he should go thus peeping and peering about I verily believe
    that yon scurvy varlet is no better than a thief, and cometh here after
    our own and the good King's dun deer." For by much roving in the forest,
    Little John had come to look upon all the deer in Sherwood as belonging
    to Robin Hood and his band as much as to good King Harry. "Nay," quoth
    he again, after a time, "this matter must e'en be looked into." So,
    quitting the highroad, he also entered the thickets, and began spying
    around after stout Arthur a Bland.

    So for a long time they both of them went hunting about, Little John
    after the Tanner, and the Tanner after the deer. At last Little John
    trod upon a stick, which snapped under his foot, whereupon, hearing the
    noise, the Tanner turned quickly and caught sight of the yeoman. Seeing
    that the Tanner had spied him out, Little John put a bold face upon the
    matter.

    "Hilloa," quoth he, "what art thou doing here, thou naughty fellow? Who
    art thou that comest ranging Sherwood's paths? In very sooth thou hast
    an evil cast of countenance, and I do think, truly, that thou art no
    better than a thief, and comest after our good King's deer."

    "Nay," quoth the Tanner boldly - for, though taken by surprise, he was
    not a man to be frightened by big words - "thou liest in thy teeth. I am
    no thief, but an honest craftsman. As for my countenance, it is what
    it is; and, for the matter of that, thine own is none too pretty, thou
    saucy fellow."

    "Ha!" quoth Little John in a great loud voice, "wouldst thou give me
    backtalk? Now I have a great part of a mind to crack thy pate for thee.
    I would have thee know, fellow, that I am, as it were, one of the King's
    foresters. Leastwise," muttered he to himself, "I and my friends do take
    good care of our good sovereign's deer."

    "I care not who thou art," answered the bold Tanner, "and unless thou
    hast many more of thy kind by thee, thou canst never make Arthur a Bland
    cry 'A mercy.'"

    "Is it so?" cried Little John in a rage. "Now, by my faith, thou saucy
    rogue, thy tongue hath led thee into a pit thou wilt have a sorry time
    getting out of; for I will give thee such a drubbing as ne'er hast thou
    had in all thy life before. Take thy staff in thy hand, fellow, for I
    will not smite an unarmed man.

    "Marry come up with a murrain!" cried the Tanner, for he, too, had
    talked himself into a fume. "Big words ne'er killed so much as a mouse.
    Who art thou that talkest so freely of cracking the head of Arthur a
    Bland? If I do not tan thy hide this day as ne'er I tanned a calf's hide
    in all my life before, split my staff into skewers for lamb's flesh and
    call me no more brave man! Now look to thyself, fellow!"

    "Stay!" said Little John. "Let us first measure our cudgels. I do reckon
    my staff longer than thine, and I would not take vantage of thee by even
    so much as an inch."

    "Nay, I pass not for length," answered the Tanner. "My staff is long
    enough to knock down a calf; so look to thyself, fellow, I say again."

    So, without more ado, each gripped his staff in the middle, and, with
    fell and angry looks, they came slowly together.


    Now news had been brought to Robin Hood how that Little John, instead of
    doing his bidding, had passed by duty for pleasure, and so had stopped
    overnight with merry company at the Blue Boar Inn, instead of going
    straight to Ancaster. So, being vexed to his heart by this, he set forth
    at dawn of day to seek Little John at the Blue Boar, or at least to
    meet the yeoman on the way, and ease his heart of what he thought of the
    matter. As thus he strode along in anger, putting together the words he
    would use to chide Little John, he heard, of a sudden, loud and angry
    voices, as of men in a rage, passing fell words back and forth from one
    to the other. At this, Robin Hood stopped and listened. "Surely," quoth
    he to himself, "that is Little John's voice, and he is talking in anger
    also. Methinks the other is strange to my ears. Now Heaven forfend that
    my good trusty Little John should have fallen into the hands of the
    King's rangers. I must see to this matter, and that quickly."

    Thus spoke Robin Hood to himself, all his anger passing away like a
    breath from the windowpane, at the thought that perhaps his trusty
    right-hand man was in some danger of his life. So cautiously he made his
    way through the thickets whence the voices came, and, pushing aside the
    leaves, peeped into the little open space where the two men, staff in
    hand, were coming slowly together.

    "Ha!" quoth Robin to himself, "here is merry sport afoot. Now I would
    give three golden angels from my own pocket if yon stout fellow would
    give Little John a right sound drubbing! It would please me to see him
    well thumped for having failed in my bidding. I fear me, though, there
    is but poor chance of my seeing such a pleasant sight." So saying, he
    stretched himself at length upon the ground, that he might not only see
    the sport the better, but that he might enjoy the merry sight at his
    ease.

    As you may have seen two dogs that think to fight, walking slowly round
    and round each other, neither cur wishing to begin the combat, so those
    two stout yeomen moved slowly around, each watching for a chance to take
    the other unaware, and so get in the first blow. At last Little John
    struck like a flash, and - "rap!" - the Tanner met the blow and turned it
    aside, and then smote back at Little John, who also turned the blow; and
    so this mighty battle began. Then up and down and back and forth they
    trod, the blows falling so thick and fast that, at a distance, one would
    have thought that half a score of men were fighting. Thus they fought
    for nigh a half an hour, until the ground was all plowed up with the
    digging of their heels, and their breathing grew labored like the ox in
    the furrow. But Little John suffered the most, for he had become unused
    to such stiff labor, and his joints were not as supple as they had been
    before he went to dwell with the Sheriff.

    All this time Robin Hood lay beneath the bush, rejoicing at such a
    comely bout of quarterstaff. "By my faith!" quoth he to himself, "never
    had I thought to see Little John so evenly matched in all my life.
    Belike, though, he would have overcome yon fellow before this had he
    been in his former trim."

    At last Little John saw his chance, and, throwing all the strength
    he felt going from him into one blow that might have felled an ox,
    he struck at the Tanner with might and main. And now did the Tanner's
    cowhide cap stand him in good stead, and but for it he might never have
    held staff in hand again. As it was, the blow he caught beside the head
    was so shrewd that it sent him staggering across the little glade, so
    that, if Little John had had the strength to follow up his vantage, it
    would have been ill for stout Arthur. But he regained himself quickly
    and, at arm's length, struck back a blow at Little John, and this time
    the stroke reached its mark, and down went Little John at full length,
    his cudgel flying from his hand as he fell. Then, raising his staff,
    stout Arthur dealt him another blow upon the ribs.

    "Hold!" roared Little John. "Wouldst thou strike a man when he is down?"

    "Ay, marry would I," quoth the Tanner, giving him another thwack with
    his staff.

    "Stop!" roared Little John. "Help! Hold, I say! I yield me! I yield me,
    I say, good fellow!"

    "Hast thou had enough?" asked the Tanner grimly, holding his staff
    aloft.

    "Ay, marry, and more than enough."

    "And thou dost own that I am the better man of the two?"

    "Yea, truly, and a murrain seize thee!" said Little John, the first
    aloud and the last to his beard.

    "Then thou mayst go thy ways; and thank thy patron saint that I am a
    merciful man," said the Tanner.

    "A plague o' such mercy as thine!" said Little John, sitting up and
    feeling his ribs where the Tanner had cudgeled him. "I make my vow, my
    ribs feel as though every one of them were broken in twain. I tell thee,
    good fellow, I did think there was never a man in all Nottinghamshire
    could do to me what thou hast done this day."

    "And so thought I, also," cried Robin Hood, bursting out of the thicket
    and shouting with laughter till the tears ran down his cheeks. "O man,
    man!" said he, as well as he could for his mirth, "'a didst go over
    like a bottle knocked from a wall. I did see the whole merry bout, and
    never did I think to see thee yield thyself so, hand and foot, to any
    man in all merry England. I was seeking thee, to chide thee for leaving
    my bidding undone; but thou hast been paid all I owed thee, full
    measure, pressed down and overflowing, by this good fellow. Marry, 'a
    did reach out his arm full length while thou stood gaping at him, and,
    with a pretty rap, tumbled thee over as never have I seen one tumbled
    before." So spoke bold Robin, and all the time Little John sat upon the
    ground, looking as though he had sour curds in his mouth. "What may be
    thy name, good fellow?" said Robin, next, turning to the Tanner.

    "Men do call me Arthur a Bland," spoke up the Tanner boldly, "and now
    what may be thy name?"

    "Ha, Arthur a Bland!" quoth Robin, "I have heard thy name before, good
    fellow. Thou didst break the crown of a friend of mine at the fair at
    Ely last October. The folk there call him Jock o' Nottingham; we call
    him Will Scathelock. This poor fellow whom thou hast so belabored is
    counted the best hand at the quarterstaff in all merry England. His name
    is Little John, and mine Robin Hood."

    "How!" cried the Tanner, "art thou indeed the great Robin Hood, and is
    this the famous Little John? Marry, had I known who thou art, I would
    never have been so bold as to lift my hand against thee. Let me help
    thee to thy feet, good Master Little John, and let me brush the dust
    from off thy coat."

    "Nay," quoth Little John testily, at the same time rising carefully,
    as though his bones had been made of glass, "I can help myself, good
    fellow, without thy aid; and let me tell thee, had it not been for that
    vile cowskin cap of thine, it would have been ill for thee this day."

    At this Robin laughed again, and, turning to the Tanner, he said, "Wilt
    thou join my band, good Arthur? For I make my vow thou art one of the
    stoutest men that ever mine eyes beheld."

    "Will I join thy band?" cried the Tanner joyfully. "Ay, marry, will I!
    Hey for a merry life!" cried he, leaping aloft and snapping his fingers,
    "and hey for the life I love! Away with tanbark and filthy vats and foul
    cowhides! I will follow thee to the ends of the earth, good master, and
    not a herd of dun deer in all the forest but shall know the sound of the
    twang of my bowstring."

    "As for thee, Little John," said Robin, turning to him and laughing,
    "thou wilt start once more for Ancaster, and we will go part way with
    thee, for I will not have thee turn again to either the right hand or
    the left till thou hast fairly gotten away from Sherwood. There are
    other inns that thou knowest yet, hereabouts." Thereupon, leaving the
    thickets, they took once more to the highway and departed upon their
    business.




    Robin Hood and Will Scarlet

    THUS THEY traveled along the sunny road, three stout fellows such as you
    could hardly match anywhere else in all merry England. Many stopped to
    gaze after them as they strode along, so broad were their shoulders and
    so sturdy their gait.

    Quoth Robin Hood to Little John, "Why didst thou not go straight to
    Ancaster, yesterday, as I told thee? Thou hadst not gotten thyself into
    such a coil hadst thou done as I ordered."

    "I feared the rain that threatened," said Little John in a sullen tone,
    for he was vexed at being so chaffed by Robin with what had happened to
    him.

    "The rain!" cried Robin, stopping of a sudden in the middle of the road,
    and looking at Little John in wonder. "Why, thou great oaf! not a drop
    of rain has fallen these three days, neither has any threatened, nor
    hath there been a sign of foul weather in earth or sky or water."

    "Nevertheless," growled Little John, "the holy Saint Swithin holdeth the
    waters of the heavens in his pewter pot, and he could have poured them
    out, had he chosen, even from a clear sky; and wouldst thou have had me
    wet to the skin?"

    At this Robin Hood burst into a roar of laughter. "O Little John!" said
    he, "what butter wits hast thou in that head of thine! Who could hold
    anger against such a one as thou art?"

    So saying, they all stepped out once more, with the right foot foremost,
    as the saying is.

    After they had traveled some distance, the day being warm and the road
    dusty, Robin Hood waxed thirsty; so, there being a fountain of water as
    cold as ice, just behind the hedgerow, they crossed the stile and came
    to where the water bubbled up from beneath a mossy stone. Here, kneeling
    and making cups of the palms of their hands, they drank their fill,
    and then, the spot being cool and shady, they stretched their limbs and
    rested them for a space.

    In front of them, over beyond the hedge, the dusty road stretched away
    across the plain; behind them the meadow lands and bright green fields
    of tender young corn lay broadly in the sun, and overhead spread the
    shade of the cool, rustling leaves of the beechen tree. Pleasantly to
    their nostrils came the tender fragrance of the purple violets and
    wild thyme that grew within the dewy moisture of the edge of the little
    fountain, and pleasantly came the soft gurgle of the water. All was so
    pleasant and so full of the gentle joy of the bright Maytime, that for a
    long time no one of the three cared to speak, but each lay on his back,
    gazing up through the trembling leaves of the trees to the bright
    sky overhead. At last, Robin, whose thoughts were not quite so busy
    wool-gathering as those of the others, and who had been gazing around
    him now and then, broke the silence.

    "Heyday!" quoth he, "yon is a gaily feathered bird, I take my vow."

    The others looked and saw a young man walking slowly down the highway.
    Gay was he, indeed, as Robin had said, and a fine figure he cut, for
    his doublet was of scarlet silk and his stockings also; a handsome sword
    hung by his side, the embossed leathern scabbard being picked out with
    fine threads of gold; his cap was of scarlet velvet, and a broad feather
    hung down behind and back of one ear. His hair was long and yellow and
    curled upon his shoulders, and in his hand he bore an early rose, which
    he smelled at daintily now and then.

    "By my life!" quoth Robin Hood, laughing, "saw ye e'er such a pretty,
    mincing fellow?"

    "Truly, his clothes have overmuch prettiness for my taste," quoth Arthur
    a Bland, "but, ne'ertheless, his shoulders are broad and his loins are
    narrow, and seest thou, good master, how that his arms hang from his
    body? They dangle not down like spindles, but hang stiff and bend at
    the elbow. I take my vow, there be no bread and milk limbs in those fine
    clothes, but stiff joints and tough thews."

    "Methinks thou art right, friend Arthur," said Little John. "I do verily
    think that yon is no such roseleaf and whipped-cream gallant as he would
    have one take him to be."

    "Pah!" quoth Robin Hood, "the sight of such a fellow doth put a nasty
    taste into my mouth! Look how he doth hold that fair flower betwixt his
    thumb and finger, as he would say, 'Good rose, I like thee not so ill
    but I can bear thy odor for a little while.' I take it ye are both
    wrong, and verily believe that were a furious mouse to run across his
    path, he would cry, 'La!' or 'Alack-a-day!' and fall straightway into a
    swoon. I wonder who he may be."

    "Some great baron's son, I doubt not," answered Little John, "with good
    and true men's money lining his purse."

    "Ay, marry, that is true, I make no doubt," quoth Robin. "What a pity
    that such men as he, that have no thought but to go abroad in gay
    clothes, should have good fellows, whose shoes they are not fit to tie,
    dancing at their bidding. By Saint Dunstan, Saint Alfred, Saint Withold,
    and all the good men in the Saxon calendar, it doth make me mad to see
    such gay lordlings from over the sea go stepping on the necks of good
    Saxons who owned this land before ever their great-grandsires chewed
    rind of brawn! By the bright bow of Heaven, I will have their ill-gotten
    gains from them, even though I hang for it as high as e'er a forest tree
    in Sherwood!"

    "Why, how now, master," quoth Little John, "what heat is this? Thou
    dost set thy pot a-boiling, and mayhap no bacon to cook! Methinks yon
    fellow's hair is overlight for Norman locks. He may be a good man and
    true for aught thou knowest."

    "Nay," said Robin, "my head against a leaden farthing, he is what I say.
    So, lie ye both here, I say, till I show you how I drub this fellow."
    So saying, Robin Hood stepped forth from the shade of the beech tree,
    crossed the stile, and stood in the middle of the road, with his hands
    on his hips, in the stranger's path.

    Meantime the stranger, who had been walking so slowly that all this
    talk was held before he came opposite the place where they were, neither
    quickened his pace nor seemed to see that such a man as Robin Hood was
    in the world. So Robin stood in the middle of the road, waiting while
    the other walked slowly forward, smelling his rose, and looking this way
    and that, and everywhere except at Robin.

    "Hold!" cried Robin, when at last the other had come close to him.
    "Hold! Stand where thou art!"

    "Wherefore should I hold, good fellow?" said the stranger in soft and
    gentle voice. "And wherefore should I stand where I am? Ne'ertheless, as
    thou dost desire that I should stay, I will abide for a short time, that
    I may hear what thou mayst have to say to me."

    "Then," quoth Robin, "as thou dost so fairly do as I tell thee, and dost
    give me such soft speech, I will also treat thee with all due courtesy.
    I would have thee know, fair friend, that I am, as it were, a votary at
    the shrine of Saint Wilfred who, thou mayst know, took, willy-nilly,
    all their gold from the heathen, and melted it up into candlesticks.
    Wherefore, upon such as come hereabouts, I levy a certain toll, which
    I use for a better purpose, I hope, than to make candlesticks withal.
    Therefore, sweet chuck, I would have thee deliver to me thy purse, that
    I may look into it, and judge, to the best of my poor powers, whether
    thou hast more wealth about thee than our law allows. For, as our good
    Gaffer Swanthold sayeth, 'He who is fat from overliving must needs lose
    blood.'"

    All this time the youth had been sniffing at the rose that he held
    betwixt his thumb and finger. "Nay," said he with a gentle smile, when
    Robin Hood had done, "I do love to hear thee talk, thou pretty fellow,
    and if, haply, thou art not yet done, finish, I beseech thee. I have yet
    some little time to stay."

    "I have said all," quoth Robin, "and now, if thou wilt give me thy
    purse, I will let thee go thy way without let or hindrance so soon as I
    shall see what it may hold. I will take none from thee if thou hast but
    little."

    "Alas! It doth grieve me much," said the other, "that I cannot do
    as thou dost wish. I have nothing to give thee. Let me go my way, I
    prythee. I have done thee no harm."

    "Nay, thou goest not," quoth Robin, "till thou hast shown me thy purse."

    "Good friend," said the other gently, "I have business elsewhere. I
    have given thee much time and have heard thee patiently. Prythee, let me
    depart in peace."

    "I have spoken to thee, friend," said Robin sternly, "and I now tell
    thee again, that thou goest not one step forward till thou hast done as
    I bid thee." So saying, he raised his quarterstaff above his head in a
    threatening way.

    "Alas!" said the stranger sadly, "it doth grieve me that this thing must
    be. I fear much that I must slay thee, thou poor fellow!" So saying, he
    drew his sword.

    "Put by thy weapon," quoth Robin. "I would take no vantage of thee. Thy
    sword cannot stand against an oaken staff such as mine. I could snap
    it like a barley straw. Yonder is a good oaken thicket by the roadside;
    take thee a cudgel thence and defend thyself fairly, if thou hast a
    taste for a sound drubbing."

    First the stranger measured Robin with his eye, and then he measured the
    oaken staff. "Thou art right, good fellow," said he presently, "truly,
    my sword is no match for that cudgel of thine. Bide thee awhile till
    I get me a staff." So saying, he threw aside the rose that he had been
    holding all this time, thrust his sword back into the scabbard, and,
    with a more hasty step than he had yet used, stepped to the roadside
    where grew the little clump of ground oaks Robin had spoken of. Choosing
    among them, he presently found a sapling to his liking. He did not cut
    it, but, rolling up his sleeves a little way, he laid hold of it, placed
    his heel against the ground, and, with one mighty pull, plucked the
    young tree up by the roots from out the very earth. Then he came back,
    trimming away the roots and tender stems with his sword as quietly as if
    he had done nought to speak of.

    Little John and the Tanner had been watching all that passed, but when
    they saw the stranger drag the sapling up from the earth, and heard the
    rending and snapping of its roots, the Tanner pursed his lips together,
    drawing his breath between them in a long inward whistle.

    "By the breath of my body!" said Little John, as soon as he could gather
    his wits from their wonder, "sawest thou that, Arthur? Marry, I think
    our poor master will stand but an ill chance with yon fellow. By Our
    Lady, he plucked up yon green tree as it were a barley straw."

    Whatever Robin Hood thought, he stood his ground, and now he and the
    stranger in scarlet stood face to face.

    Well did Robin Hood hold his own that day as a mid-country yeoman. This
    way and that they fought, and back and forth, Robin's skill against the
    stranger's strength. The dust of the highway rose up around them like
    a cloud, so that at times Little John and the Tanner could see nothing,
    but only hear the rattle of the staves against one another. Thrice Robin
    Hood struck the stranger; once upon the arm and twice upon the ribs, and
    yet had he warded all the other's blows, only one of which, had it met
    its mark, would have laid stout Robin lower in the dust than he had ever
    gone before. At last the stranger struck Robin's cudgel so fairly in the
    middle that he could hardly hold his staff in his hand; again he struck,
    and Robin bent beneath the blow; a third time he struck, and now not
    only fairly beat down Robin's guard, but gave him such a rap, also, that
    down he tumbled into the dusty road.

    "Hold!" cried Robin Hood, when he saw the stranger raising his staff
    once more. "I yield me!"

    "Hold!" cried Little John, bursting from his cover, with the Tanner at
    his heels. "Hold! give over, I say!"

    "Nay," answered the stranger quietly, "if there be two more of you,
    and each as stout as this good fellow, I am like to have my hands full.
    Nevertheless, come on, and I will strive my best to serve you all."

    "Stop!" cried Robin Hood, "we will fight no more. I take my vow, this
    is an ill day for thee and me, Little John. I do verily believe that
    my wrist, and eke my arm, are palsied by the jar of the blow that this
    stranger struck me."

    Then Little John turned to Robin Hood. "Why, how now, good master," said
    he. "Alas! Thou art in an ill plight. Marry, thy jerkin is all befouled
    with the dust of the road. Let me help thee to arise."

    "A plague on thy aid!" cried Robin angrily. "I can get to my feet
    without thy help, good fellow."

    "Nay, but let me at least dust thy coat for thee. I fear thy poor bones
    are mightily sore," quoth Little John soberly, but with a sly twinkle in
    his eyes.

    "Give over, I say!" quoth Robin in a fume. "My coat hath been dusted
    enough already, without aid of thine." Then, turning to the stranger, he
    said, "What may be thy name, good fellow?"

    "My name is Gamwell," answered the other.

    "Ha!" cried Robin, "is it even so? I have near kin of that name. Whence
    camest thou, fair friend?"

    "From Maxfield Town I come," answered the stranger. "There was I born
    and bred, and thence I come to seek my mother's young brother, whom men
    call Robin Hood. So, if perchance thou mayst direct me - "

    "Ha! Will Gamwell!" cried Robin, placing both hands upon the other's
    shoulders and holding him off at arm's length. "Surely, it can be none
    other! I might have known thee by that pretty maiden air of thine - that
    dainty, finicking manner of gait. Dost thou not know me, lad? Look upon
    me well."

    "Now, by the breath of my body!" cried the other, "I do believe from my
    heart that thou art mine own Uncle Robin. Nay, certain it is so!" And
    each flung his arms around the other, kissing him upon the cheek.

    Then once more Robin held his kinsman off at arm's length and scanned
    him keenly from top to toe. "Why, how now," quoth he, "what change is
    here? Verily, some eight or ten years ago I left thee a stripling lad,
    with great joints and ill-hung limbs, and lo! here thou art, as tight a
    fellow as e'er I set mine eyes upon. Dost thou not remember, lad, how I
    showed thee the proper way to nip the goose feather betwixt thy fingers
    and throw out thy bow arm steadily? Thou gayest great promise of being a
    keen archer. And dost thou not mind how I taught thee to fend and parry
    with the cudgel?"

    "Yea," said young Gamwell, "and I did so look up to thee, and thought
    thee so above all other men that, I make my vow, had I known who thou
    wert, I would never have dared to lift hand against thee this day. I
    trust I did thee no great harm."

    "No, no," quoth Robin hastily, and looking sideways at Little John,
    "thou didst not harm me. But say no more of that, I prythee. Yet I will
    say, lad, that I hope I may never feel again such a blow as thou didst
    give me. By'r Lady, my arm doth tingle yet from fingernail to elbow.
    Truly, I thought that I was palsied for life. I tell thee, coz, that
    thou art the strongest man that ever I laid mine eyes upon. I take my
    vow, I felt my stomach quake when I beheld thee pluck up yon green tree
    as thou didst. But tell me, how camest thou to leave Sir Edward and thy
    mother?"

    "Alas!" answered young Gamwell, "it is an ill story, uncle, that I
    have to tell thee. My father's steward, who came to us after old Giles
    Crookleg died, was ever a saucy varlet, and I know not why my father
    kept him, saving that he did oversee with great judgment. It used to
    gall me to hear him speak up so boldly to my father, who, thou knowest,
    was ever a patient man to those about him, and slow to anger and harsh
    words. Well, one day - and an ill day it was for that saucy fellow - he
    sought to berate my father, I standing by. I could stand it no
    longer, good uncle, so, stepping forth, I gave him a box o' the ear,
    and - wouldst thou believe it? - the fellow straightway died o't. I think
    they said I broke his neck, or something o' the like. So off they packed
    me to seek thee and escape the law. I was on my way when thou sawest me,
    and here I am."

    "Well, by the faith of my heart," quoth Robin Hood, "for anyone escaping
    the law, thou wast taking it the most easily that ever I beheld in all
    my life. Whenever did anyone in all the world see one who had slain a
    man, and was escaping because of it, tripping along the highway like a
    dainty court damsel, sniffing at a rose the while?"

    "Nay, uncle," answered Will Gamwell, "overhaste never churned good
    butter, as the old saying hath it. Moreover, I do verily believe that
    this overstrength of my body hath taken the nimbleness out of my heels.
    Why, thou didst but just now rap me thrice, and I thee never a once,
    save by overbearing thee by my strength."

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "let us say no more on that score. I am right glad
    to see thee, Will, and thou wilt add great honor and credit to my band
    of merry fellows. But thou must change thy name, for warrants will be
    out presently against thee; so, because of thy gay clothes, thou shalt
    henceforth and for aye be called Will Scarlet."

    "Will Scarlet," quoth Little John, stepping forward and reaching out his
    great palm, which the other took, "Will Scarlet, the name fitteth thee
    well. Right glad am I to welcome thee among us. I am called Little John;
    and this is a new member who has just joined us, a stout tanner named
    Arthur a Bland. Thou art like to achieve fame, Will, let me tell thee,
    for there will be many a merry ballad sung about the country, and many
    a merry story told in Sherwood of how Robin Hood taught Little John and
    Arthur a Bland the proper way to use the quarterstaff; likewise, as
    it were, how our good master bit off so large a piece of cake that he
    choked on it."

    "Nay, good Little John," quoth Robin gently, for he liked ill to have
    such a jest told of him. "Why should we speak of this little matter?
    Prythee, let us keep this day's doings among ourselves."

    "With all my heart," quoth Little John. "But, good master, I thought
    that thou didst love a merry story, because thou hast so often made a
    jest about a certain increase of fatness on my joints, of flesh gathered
    by my abiding with the Sheriff of - "

    "Nay, good Little John," said Robin hastily, "I do bethink me I have
    said full enough on that score."

    "It is well," quoth Little John, "for in truth I myself have tired of
    it somewhat. But now I bethink me, thou didst also seem minded to make a
    jest of the rain that threatened last night; so - "

    "Nay, then," said Robin Hood testily, "I was mistaken. I remember me now
    it did seem to threaten rain."

    "Truly, I did think so myself," quoth Little John, "therefore, no doubt,
    thou dost think it was wise of me to abide all night at the Blue Boar
    Inn, instead of venturing forth in such stormy weather; dost thou not?"

    "A plague of thee and thy doings!" cried Robin Hood. "If thou wilt have
    it so, thou wert right to abide wherever thou didst choose."

    "Once more, it is well," quoth Little John. "As for myself, I have been
    blind this day. I did not see thee drubbed; I did not see thee tumbled
    heels over head in the dust; and if any man says that thou wert, I can
    with a clear conscience rattle his lying tongue betwixt his teeth."

    "Come," cried Robin, biting his nether lip, while the others could
    not forbear laughing. "We will go no farther today, but will return to
    Sherwood, and thou shalt go to Ancaster another time, Little John."

    So said Robin, for now that his bones were sore, he felt as though a
    long journey would be an ill thing for him. So, turning their backs,
    they retraced their steps whence they came.




    The Adventure with Midge the Miller's Son

    WHEN THE four yeomen had traveled for a long time toward Sherwood again,
    high noontide being past, they began to wax hungry. Quoth Robin Hood, "I
    would that I had somewhat to eat. Methinks a good loaf of white bread,
    with a piece of snow-white cheese, washed down with a draught of humming
    ale, were a feast for a king."

    "Since thou speakest of it," said Will Scarlet, "methinks it would not
    be amiss myself. There is that within me crieth out, 'Victuals, good
    friend, victuals!'"

    "I know a house near by," said Arthur a Bland, "and, had I but the
    money, I would bring ye that ye speak of; to wit, a sweet loaf of bread,
    a fair cheese, and a skin of brown ale."

    "For the matter of that, thou knowest I have money by me, good master,"
    quoth Little John.

    "Why, so thou hast, Little John," said Robin. "How much money will it
    take, good Arthur, to buy us meat and drink?"

    "I think that six broad pennies will buy food enow for a dozen men,"
    said the Tanner.

    "Then give him six pennies, Little John," quoth Robin, "for methinks
    food for three men will about fit my need. Now get thee gone, Arthur,
    with the money, and bring the food here, for there is a sweet shade in
    that thicket yonder, beside the road, and there will we eat our meal."

    So Little John gave Arthur the money, and the others stepped to the
    thicket, there to await the return of the Tanner.

    After a time he came back, bearing with him a great brown loaf of bread,
    and a fair, round cheese, and a goatskin full of stout March beer, slung
    over his shoulders. Then Will Scarlet took his sword and divided
    the loaf and the cheese into four fair portions, and each man helped
    himself. Then Robin Hood took a deep pull at the beer. "Aha!" said he,
    drawing in his breath, "never have I tasted sweeter drink than this."

    After this no man spake more, but each munched away at his bread and
    cheese lustily, with ever and anon a pull at the beer.

    At last Will Scarlet looked at a small piece of bread he still held in
    his hand, and quoth he, "Methinks I will give this to the sparrows." So,
    throwing it from him, he brushed the crumbs from his jerkin.

    "I, too," quoth Robin, "have had enough, I think." As for Little John
    and the Tanner, they had by this time eaten every crumb of their bread
    and cheese.

    "Now," quoth Robin, "I do feel myself another man, and would fain enjoy
    something pleasant before going farther upon our journey. I do bethink
    me, Will, that thou didst use to have a pretty voice, and one that tuned
    sweetly upon a song. Prythee, give us one ere we journey farther."

    "Truly, I do not mind turning a tune," answered Will Scarlet, "but I
    would not sing alone."

    "Nay, others will follow. Strike up, lad," quoth Robin.

    "In that case, 'tis well," said Will Scarlet. "I do call to mind a song
    that a certain minstrel used to sing in my father's hall, upon occasion.
    I know no name for it and so can give you none; but thus it is." Then,
    clearing his throat, he sang:

         "_In the merry blossom time,
         When love longings food the breast,
         When the flower is on the lime,
         When the small fowl builds her nest,
         Sweetly sings the nightingale
         And the throstle cock so bold;
         Cuckoo in the dewy dale
         And the turtle in the word.
         But the robin I love dear,
         For he singeth through the year.
         Robin! Robin!
         Merry Robin!
         So I'd have my true love be:
         Not to fly
         At the nigh
         Sign of cold adversity_.

         "_When the spring brings sweet delights,
         When aloft the lark doth rise,
         Lovers woo o' mellow nights,
         And youths peep in maidens' eyes,
         That time blooms the eglantine,
         Daisies pied upon the hill,
         Cowslips fair and columbine,
         Dusky violets by the rill.
         But the ivy green cloth grow
         When the north wind bringeth snow.
         Ivy! Ivy!
         Stanch and true!
         Thus I'd have her love to be:
         Not to die
         At the nigh
         Breath of cold adversity_."

    "'Tis well sung," quoth Robin, "but, cousin, I tell thee plain, I would
    rather hear a stout fellow like thee sing some lusty ballad than a
    finicking song of flowers and birds, and what not. Yet, thou didst sing
    it fair, and 'tis none so bad a snatch of a song, for the matter of
    that. Now, Tanner, it is thy turn."

    "I know not," quoth Arthur, smiling, with his head on one side, like a
    budding lass that is asked to dance, "I know not that I can match our
    sweet friend's song; moreover, I do verily think that I have caught a
    cold and have a certain tickling and huskiness in the windpipe."

    "Nay, sing up, friend," quoth Little John, who sat next to him, patting
    him upon the shoulder. "Thou hast a fair, round, mellow voice; let us
    have a touch of it."

    "Nay, an ye will ha' a poor thing," said Arthur, "I will do my best.
    Have ye ever heard of the wooing of Sir Keith, the stout young Cornish
    knight, in good King Arthur's time?"

    "Methinks I have heard somewhat of it," said Robin; "but ne'ertheless
    strike up thy ditty and let us hear it, for, as I do remember me, it is
    a gallant song; so out with it, good fellow."

    Thereupon, clearing his throat, the Tanner, without more ado, began to
    sing:


    THE WOOING OF SIR KEITH

         "_King Arthur sat in his royal hall,
         And about on either hand
         Was many a noble lordling tall,
         The greatest in the land.

         "Sat  Lancelot with raven locks,
         Gawaine with golden hair,
         Sir Tristram, Kay who kept the locks,
         And many another there.

         "And through the stained windows bright,
         From o'er the red-tiled eaves,
         The sunlight blazed with colored light
         On golden helms and greaves.

         "But suddenly a silence came
         About the Table Round,
         For up the hall there walked a dame
         Bent nigh unto the ground.

         "Her nose was hooked, her eyes were bleared,
         Her locks were lank and white;
         Upon her chin there grew a beard;
         She was a gruesome sight.

         "And so with crawling step she came
         And kneeled at Arthur's feet;
         Quoth Kay, 'She is the foulest dame
         That e'er my sight did greet.'

         "'O mighty King! of thee I crave
         A boon on bended knee';
         'Twas thus she spoke. 'What wouldst thou have.'
         Quoth Arthur, King, 'of me_?'

         "_Quoth she, 'I have a foul disease
         Doth gnaw my very heart,
         And but one thing can bring me ease
         Or cure my bitter smart.

         "'There is no rest, no ease for me
         North, east, or west, or south,
         Till Christian knight will willingly
         Thrice kiss me on the mouth.

         "'Nor wedded may this childe have been
         That giveth ease to me;
         Nor may he be constrained, I ween,
         But kiss me willingly.

         "'So is there here one Christian knight
         Of such a noble strain
         That he will give a tortured wight
         Sweet ease of mortal pain?'

         "'A wedded man,' quoth Arthur, King,
         'A wedded man I be
         Else would I deem it noble thing
         To kiss thee willingly.

         "'Now, Lancelot, in all men's sight
         Thou art the head and chief
         Of chivalry. Come, noble knight,
         And give her quick relief.'

         "But Lancelot he turned aside
         And looked upon the ground,
         For it did sting his haughty pride
         To hear them laugh around.

         "'Come thou, Sir Tristram,' quoth the King.
         Quoth he, 'It cannot be,
         For ne'er can I my stomach bring
         To do it willingly.'

         "'Wilt thou, Sir Kay, thou scornful wight?'
         Quoth Kay, 'Nay, by my troth!
         What noble dame would kiss a knight
         That kissed so foul a mouth_?'

         "'_Wilt thou, Gawaine?' 'I cannot, King.'
         'Sir Geraint?' 'Nay, not I;
         My kisses no relief could bring,
         For sooner would I die.'

         "Then up and spake the youngest man
         Of all about the board,
         'Now such relief as Christian can
         I'll give to her, my lord.'

         "It was Sir Keith, a youthful knight,
         Yet strong of limb and bold,
         With beard upon his chin as light
         As finest threads of gold.

         "Quoth Kay, 'He hath no mistress yet
         That he may call his own,
         But here is one that's quick to get,
         As she herself has shown.'

         "He kissed her once, he kissed her twice,
         He kissed her three times o'er,
         A wondrous change came in a trice,
         And she was foul no more.

         "Her cheeks grew red as any rose,
         Her brow as white as lawn,
         Her bosom like the winter snows,
         Her eyes like those of fawn.

         "Her breath grew sweet as summer breeze
         That blows the meadows o'er;
         Her voice grew soft as rustling trees,
         And cracked and harsh no more.

         "Her hair grew glittering, like the gold,
         Her hands as white as milk;
         Her filthy rags, so foul and old,
         Were changed to robes of silk.

         "In great amaze the knights did stare.
         Quoth Kay, 'I make my vow
         If it will please thee, lady fair,
         I'll gladly kiss thee now_.'

         "_But young Sir Keith kneeled on one knee
         And kissed her robes so fair.
         'O let me be thy slave,' said he,
         'For none to thee compare.'

         "She bent her down, she kissed his brow,
         She kissed his lips and eyes.
         Quoth she, 'Thou art my master now,
         My lord, my love, arise!

         "'And all the wealth that is mine own,
         My lands, I give to thee,
         For never knight hath lady shown
         Such noble courtesy.

         "'Bewitched was I, in bitter pain,
         But thou hast set me free,
         So now I am myself again,
         I give myself to thee_.'"


    "Yea, truly," quoth Robin Hood, when the Tanner had made an end of
    singing, "it is as I remember it, a fair ditty, and a ballad with a
    pleasing tune of a song."

    "It hath oftentimes seemed to me," said Will Scarlet, "that it hath a
    certain motive in it, e'en such as this: That a duty which seemeth to us
    sometimes ugly and harsh, when we do kiss it fairly upon the mouth, so
    to speak, is no such foul thing after all."

    "Methinks thou art right," quoth Robin, "and, contrariwise, that when we
    kiss a pleasure that appeareth gay it turneth foul to us; is it not so,
    Little John? Truly such a thing hath brought thee sore thumps this day.
    Nay, man, never look down in the mouth. Clear thy pipes and sing us a
    ditty."

    "Nay," said Little John, "I have none as fair as that merry Arthur has
    trolled. They are all poor things that I know. Moreover, my voice is
    not in tune today, and I would not spoil even a tolerable song by ill
    singing."

    Upon this all pressed Little John to sing, so that when he had denied
    them a proper length of time, such as is seemly in one that is asked
    to sing, he presently yielded. Quoth he, 'Well, an ye will ha' it so,
    I will give you what I can. Like to fair Will, I have no title to my
    ditty, but thus it runs:

         "_O Lady mine, the spring is here,
         With a hey nonny nonny;
         The sweet love season of the year,
         With a ninny ninny nonny;
         Now lad and lass
         Lie in the grass
         That groweth green
         With flowers between.
         The buck doth rest
         The leaves do start,
         The cock doth crow,
         The breeze doth blow,
         And all things laugh in_ - "

    "Who may yon fellow be coming along the road?" said Robin, breaking into
    the song.

    "I know not," quoth Little John in a surly voice. "But this I do know,
    that it is an ill thing to do to check the flow of a good song."

    "Nay, Little John," said Robin, "be not vexed, I prythee; but I have
    been watching him coming along, bent beneath that great bag over his
    shoulder, ever since thou didst begin thy song. Look, Little John, I
    pray, and see if thou knowest him."

    Little John looked whither Robin Hood pointed. "Truly," quoth he, after
    a time, "I think yon fellow is a certain young miller I have seen now
    and then around the edge of Sherwood; a poor wight, methinks, to spoil a
    good song about."

    "Now thou speakest of him," quoth Robin Hood, "methinks I myself have
    seen him now and then. Hath he not a mill over beyond Nottingham Town,
    nigh to the Salisbury road?"

    "Thou art right; that is the man," said Little John.

    "A good stout fellow," quoth Robin. "I saw him crack Ned o' Bradford's
    crown about a fortnight since, and never saw I hair lifted more neatly
    in all my life before."

    By this time the young miller had come so near that they could see
    him clearly. His clothes were dusted with flour, and over his back he
    carried a great sack of meal, bending so as to bring the whole weight
    upon his shoulders, and across the sack was a thick quarterstaff. His
    limbs were stout and strong, and he strode along the dusty road right
    sturdily with the heavy sack across his shoulders. His cheeks were ruddy
    as a winter hip, his hair was flaxen in color, and on his chin was a
    downy growth of flaxen beard.

    "A good honest fellow," quoth Robin Hood, "and such an one as is a
    credit to English yeomanrie. Now let us have a merry jest with him. We
    will forth as though we were common thieves and pretend to rob him of
    his honest gains. Then will we take him into the forest and give him
    a feast such as his stomach never held in all his life before. We will
    flood his throat with good canary and send him home with crowns in his
    purse for every penny he hath. What say ye, lads?"

    "Truly, it is a merry thought," said Will Scarlet.

    "It is well planned," quoth Little John, "but all the saints preserve us
    from any more drubbings this day! Marry, my poor bones ache so that I - "

    "Prythee peace, Little John," quoth Robin. "Thy foolish tongue will get
    us both well laughed at yet."

    "My foolish tongue, forsooth," growled Little John to Arthur a Bland.
    "I would it could keep our master from getting us into another coil this
    day."

    But now the Miller, plodding along the road, had come opposite to
    where the yeomen lay hidden, whereupon all four of them ran at him and
    surrounded him.

    "Hold, friend!" cried Robin to the Miller; whereupon he turned slowly,
    with the weight of the bag upon his shoulder, and looked at each in turn
    all bewildered, for though a good stout man his wits did not skip like
    roasting chestnuts.

    "Who bids me stay?" said the Miller in a voice deep and gruff, like the
    growl of a great dog.

    "Marry, that do I," quoth Robin; "and let me tell thee, friend, thou
    hadst best mind my bidding."

    "And who art thou, good friend?" said the Miller, throwing the great
    sack of meal from his shoulder to the ground, "and who are those with
    thee?"

    "We be four good Christian men," quoth Robin, "and would fain help thee
    by carrying part of thy heavy load."

    "I give you all thanks," said the Miller, "but my bag is none that heavy
    that I cannot carry it e'en by myself."

    "Nay, thou dost mistake," quoth Robin, "I meant that thou mightest
    perhaps have some heavy farthings or pence about thee, not to speak
    of silver and gold. Our good Gaffer Swanthold sayeth that gold is an
    overheavy burden for a two-legged ass to carry; so we would e'en lift
    some of this load from thee."

    "Alas!" cried the Miller, "what would ye do to me? I have not about me
    so much as a clipped groat. Do me no harm, I pray you, but let me
    depart in peace. Moreover, let me tell you that ye are upon Robin Hood's
    ground, and should he find you seeking to rob an honest craftsman, he
    will clip your ears to your heads and scourge you even to the walls of
    Nottingham.

    "In truth I fear Robin Hood no more than I do myself," quoth jolly
    Robin. "Thou must this day give up to me every penny thou hast about
    thee. Nay, if thou dost budge an inch I will rattle this staff about
    thine ears."

    "Nay, smite me not!" cried the Miller, throwing up his elbow as though
    he feared the blow. "Thou mayst search me if thou wilt, but thou wilt
    find nothing upon me, pouch, pocket, or skin."

    "Is it so?" quoth Robin Hood, looking keenly upon him. "Now I believe
    that what thou tellest is no true tale. If I am not much mistook thou
    hast somewhat in the bottom of that fat sack of meal. Good Arthur, empty
    the bag upon the ground; I warrant thou wilt find a shilling or two in
    the flour."

    "Alas!" cried the Miller, falling upon his knees, "spoil not all my good
    meal! It can better you not, and will ruin me. Spare it, and I will give
    up the money in the bag."

    "Ha!" quoth Robin, nudging Will Scarlet. "Is it so? And have I found
    where thy money lies? Marry, I have a wondrous nose for the blessed
    image of good King Harry. I thought that I smelled gold and silver
    beneath the barley meal. Bring it straight forth, Miller."

    Then slowly the Miller arose to his feet, and slowly and unwillingly he
    untied the mouth of the bag, and slowly thrust his hands into the meal
    and began fumbling about with his arms buried to the elbows in the
    barley flour. The others gathered round him, their heads together,
    looking and wondering what he would bring forth.

    So they stood, all with their heads close together gazing down into the
    sack. But while he pretended to be searching for the money, the Miller
    gathered two great handfuls of meal. "Ha," quoth he, "here they are, the
    beauties." Then, as the others leaned still more forward to see what he
    had, he suddenly cast the meal into their faces, filling their eyes and
    noses and mouths with the flour, blinding and half choking them. Arthur
    a Bland was worse off than any, for his mouth was open, agape with
    wonder of what was to come, so that a great cloud of flour flew down his
    throat, setting him a-coughing till he could scarcely stand.

    Then, while all four stumbled about, roaring with the smart of the meal
    in their eyeballs, and while they rubbed their eyes till the tears
    made great channels on their faces through the meal, the Miller seized
    another handful of flour and another and another, throwing it in their
    faces, so that even had they had a glimmering of light before they were
    now as blind as ever a beggar in Nottinghamshire, while their hair and
    beards and clothes were as white as snow.

    Then catching up his great crabstaff, the Miller began laying about him
    as though he were clean gone mad. This way and that skipped the four,
    like peas on a drumhead, but they could see neither to defend themselves
    nor to run away. Thwack! thwack! went the Miller's cudgel across their
    backs, and at every blow great white clouds of flour rose in the air
    from their jackets and went drifting down the breeze.

    "Stop!" roared Robin at last. "Give over, good friend, I am Robin Hood!"

    "Thou liest, thou knave," cried the Miller, giving him a rap on the ribs
    that sent up a great cloud of flour like a puff of smoke. "Stout Robin
    never robbed an honest tradesman. Ha! thou wouldst have my money,
    wouldst thou?" And he gave him another blow. "Nay, thou art not getting
    thy share, thou long-legged knave. Share and share alike." And he smote
    Little John across the shoulders so that he sent him skipping half
    across the road. "Nay, fear not, it is thy turn now, black beard." And
    he gave the Tanner a crack that made him roar for all his coughing. "How
    now, red coat, let me brush the dust from thee!" cried he, smiting Will
    Scarlet. And so he gave them merry words and blows until they could
    scarcely stand, and whenever he saw one like to clear his eyes he threw
    more flour in his face. At last Robin Hood found his horn and clapping
    it to his lips, blew three loud blasts upon it.

    Now it chanced that Will Stutely and a party of Robin's men were in the
    glade not far from where this merry sport was going forward. Hearing the
    hubbub of voices, and blows that sounded like the noise of a flail in
    the barn in wintertime, they stopped, listening and wondering what was
    toward. Quoth Will Stutely, "Now if I mistake not there is some stout
    battle with cudgels going forward not far hence. I would fain see this
    pretty sight." So saying, he and the whole party turned their steps
    whence the noise came. When they had come near where all the tumult
    sounded they heard the three blasts of Robin's bugle horn.

    "Quick!" cried young David of Doncaster. "Our master is in sore need!"
    So, without stopping a moment, they dashed forward with might and main
    and burst forth from the covert into the highroad.

    But what a sight was that which they saw! The road was all white with
    meal, and five men stood there also white with meal from top to toe, for
    much of the barley flour had fallen back upon the Miller.

    "What is thy need, master?" cried Will Stutely. "And what doth all this
    mean?"

    "Why," quoth Robin in a mighty passion, "yon traitor felt low hath come
    as nigh slaying me as e'er a man in all the world. Hadst thou not come
    quickly, good Stutely, thy master had been dead."

    Hereupon, while he and the three others rubbed the meal from their eyes,
    and Will Stutely and his men brushed their clothes clean, he told them
    all; how that he had meant to pass a jest upon the Miller, which same
    had turned so grievously upon them.

    "Quick, men, seize the vile Miller!" cried Stutely, who was nigh choking
    with laughter as were the rest; whereupon several ran upon the stout
    fellow and seizing him, bound his arms behind his back with bowstrings.

    "Ha!" cried Robin, when they brought the trembling Miller to him. "Thou
    wouldst murder me, wouldst thou? By my faith," - Here he stopped and stood
    glaring upon the Miller grimly. But Robin's anger could not hold, so
    first his eyes twinkled, and then in spite of all he broke into a laugh.

    Now when they saw their master laugh, the yeomen who stood around could
    contain themselves no longer, and a mighty shout of laughter went up
    from all. Many could not stand, but rolled upon the ground from pure
    merriment.

    "What is thy name, good fellow?" said Robin at last to the Miller, who
    stood gaping and as though he were in amaze.

    "Alas, sir, I am Midge, the Miller's son," said he in a frightened
    voice.

    "I make my vow," quoth merry Robin, smiting him upon the shoulder, "thou
    art the mightiest Midge that e'er mine eyes beheld. Now wilt thou leave
    thy dusty mill and come and join my band? By my faith, thou art too
    stout a man to spend thy days betwixt the hopper and the till."

    "Then truly, if thou dost forgive me for the blows I struck, not knowing
    who thou wast, I will join with thee right merrily," said the Miller.

    "Then have I gained this day," quoth Robin, "the three stoutest yeomen
    in all Nottinghamshire. We will get us away to the greenwood tree, and
    there hold a merry feast in honor of our new friends, and mayhap a cup
    or two of good sack and canary may mellow the soreness of my poor joints
    and bones, though I warrant it will be many a day before I am again the
    man I was." So saying, he turned and led the way, the rest following,
    and so they entered the forest once more and were lost to sight.

    So that night all was ablaze with crackling fires in the woodlands,
    for though Robin and those others spoken of, only excepting Midge, the
    Miller's son, had many a sore bump and bruise here and there on their
    bodies, they were still not so sore in the joints that they could not
    enjoy a jolly feast given all in welcome to the new members of the band.
    Thus with songs and jesting and laughter that echoed through the deeper
    and more silent nooks of the forest, the night passed quickly along, as
    such merry times are wont to do, until at last each man sought his couch
    and silence fell on all things and all things seemed to sleep.

    But Little John's tongue was ever one that was not easy of guidance,
    so that, inch by inch, the whole story of his fight with the Tanner and
    Robin's fight with Will Scarlet leaked out. And so I have told it that
    you may laugh at the merry tale along with me.




    Robin Hood and Allan a Dale

    IT HAS just been told how three unlucky adventures fell upon Robin Hood
    and Little John all in one day bringing them sore ribs and aching bones.
    So next we will tell how they made up for those ill happenings by a good
    action that came about not without some small pain to Robin.

    Two days had passed by, and somewhat of the soreness had passed away
    from Robin Hood's joints, yet still, when he moved of a sudden and
    without thinking, pain here and there would, as it were, jog him,
    crying, "Thou hast had a drubbing, good fellow."

    The day was bright and jocund, and the morning dew still lay upon the
    grass. Under the greenwood tree sat Robin Hood; on one side was Will
    Scarlet, lying at full length upon his back, gazing up into the clear
    sky, with hands clasped behind his head; upon the other side sat Little
    John, fashioning a cudgel out of a stout crab-tree limb; elsewhere upon
    the grass sat or lay many others of the band.

    "By the faith of my heart," quoth merry Robin, "I do bethink me that we
    have had no one to dine with us for this long time. Our money groweth
    low in the purse, for no one hath come to pay a reckoning for many a
    day. Now busk thee, good Stutely, and choose thee six men, and get thee
    gone to Fosse Way or thereabouts, and see that thou bringest someone to
    eat with us this evening. Meantime we will prepare a grand feast to do
    whosoever may come the greater honor. And stay, good Stutely. I would
    have thee take Will Scarlet with thee, for it is meet that he should
    become acquaint with the ways of the forest."

    "Now do I thank thee, good master," quoth Stutely, springing to his
    feet, "that thou hast chosen me for this adventure. Truly, my limbs
    do grow slack through abiding idly here. As for two of my six, I will
    choose Midge the Miller and Arthur a Bland, for, as well thou knowest,
    good master, they are stout fists at the quarterstaff. Is it not so,
    Little John?"

    At this all laughed but Little John and Robin, who twisted up his face.
    "I can speak for Midge," said he, "and likewise for my cousin Scarlet.
    This very blessed morn I looked at my ribs and found them as many colors
    as a beggar's cloak."

    So, having chosen four more stout fellows, Will Stutely and his band set
    forth to Fosse Way, to find whether they might not come across some rich
    guest to feast that day in Sherwood with Robin and his band.

    For all the livelong day they abided near this highway. Each man had
    brought with him a good store of cold meat and a bottle of stout March
    beer to stay his stomach till the homecoming. So when high noontide
    had come they sat them down upon the soft grass, beneath a green and
    wide-spreading hawthorn bush, and held a hearty and jovial feast. After
    this, one kept watch while the others napped, for it was a still and
    sultry day.

    Thus they passed the time pleasantly enow, but no guest such as they
    desired showed his face in all the time that they lay hidden there. Many
    passed along the dusty road in the glare of the sun: now it was a bevy
    of chattering damsels merrily tripping along; now it was a plodding
    tinker; now a merry shepherd lad; now a sturdy farmer; all gazing ahead
    along the road, unconscious of the seven stout fellows that lay hidden
    so near them. Such were the travelers along the way; but fat abbot, rich
    esquire, or money-laden usurer came there none.

    At last the sun began to sink low in the heavens; the light grew red
    and the shadows long. The air grew full of silence, the birds twittered
    sleepily, and from afar came, faint and clear, the musical song of the
    milkmaid calling the kine home to the milking.

    Then Stutely arose from where he was lying. "A plague of such ill luck!"
    quoth he. "Here have we abided all day, and no bird worth the shooting,
    so to speak, hath come within reach of our bolt. Had I gone forth on
    an innocent errand, I had met a dozen stout priests or a score of pursy
    money-lenders. But it is ever thus: the dun deer are never so scarce
    as when one has a gray goose feather nipped betwixt the fingers. Come,
    lads, let us pack up and home again, say I."

    Accordingly, the others arose, and, coming forth from out the thicket,
    they all turned their toes back again to Sherwood. After they had gone
    some distance, Will Stutely, who headed the party, suddenly stopped.
    "Hist!" quoth he, for his ears were as sharp as those of a five-year-old
    fox. "Hark, lads! Methinks I hear a sound." At this all stopped and
    listened with bated breath, albeit for a time they could hear nothing,
    their ears being duller than Stutely's. At length they heard a faint and
    melancholy sound, like someone in lamentation.

    "Ha!" quoth Will Scarlet, "this must be looked into. There is someone in
    distress nigh to us here."

    "I know not," quoth Will Stutely, shaking his head doubtfully, "our
    master is ever rash about thrusting his finger into a boiling pot; but,
    for my part, I see no use in getting ourselves into mischievous coils.
    Yon is a man's voice, if I mistake not, and a man should be always ready
    to get himself out from his own pothers."

    Then out spake Will Scarlet boldly. "Now out upon thee, to talk in that
    manner, Stutely! Stay, if thou dost list. I go to see what may be the
    trouble of this poor creature."

    "Nay," quoth Stutely, "thou dost leap so quickly, thou'lt tumble into
    the ditch. Who said I would not go? Come along, say I." Thus saying,
    he led the way, the others following, till, after they had gone a short
    distance, they came to a little opening in the woodland, whence a brook,
    after gurgling out from under the tangle of overhanging bushes, spread
    out into a broad and glassy-pebbled pool. By the side of this pool, and
    beneath the branches of a willow, lay a youth upon his face, weeping
    aloud, the sound of which had first caught the quick ears of Stutely.
    His golden locks were tangled, his clothes were all awry, and everything
    about him betokened sorrow and woe. Over his head, from the branches of
    the osier, hung a beautiful harp of polished wood inlaid with gold and
    silver in fantastic devices. Beside him lay a stout ashen bow and half a
    score of fair, smooth arrows.

    "Halloa!" shouted Will Stutely, when they had come out from the forest
    into the little open spot. "Who art thou, fellow, that liest there
    killing all the green grass with salt water?"

    Hearing the voice, the stranger sprang to his feet and; snatching up
    his bow and fitting a shaft, held himself in readiness for whatever ill
    might befall him.

    "Truly," said one of the yeomen, when they had seen the young stranger's
    face, "I do know that lad right well. He is a certain minstrel that I
    have seen hereabouts more than once. It was only a week ago I saw him
    skipping across the hill like a yearling doe. A fine sight he was then,
    with a flower at his ear and a cock's plume stuck in his cap; but now,
    methinks, our cockerel is shorn of his gay feathers."

    "Pah!" cried Will Stutely, coming up to the stranger, "wipe thine eyes,
    man! I do hate to see a tall, stout fellow so sniveling like a girl
    of fourteen over a dead tomtit. Put down thy bow, man! We mean thee no
    harm."

    But Will Scarlet, seeing how the stranger, who had a young and boyish
    look, was stung by the words that Stutely had spoken, came to him and
    put his hand upon the youth's shoulder. "Nay, thou art in trouble, poor
    boy!" said he kindly. "Mind not what these fellows have said. They are
    rough, but they mean thee well. Mayhap they do not understand a lad like
    thee. Thou shalt come with us, and perchance we may find a certain one
    that can aid thee in thy perplexities, whatsoever they may be."

    "Yea, truly, come along," said Will Stutely gruffly. "I meant thee no
    harm, and may mean thee some good. Take down thy singing tool from off
    this fair tree, and away with us."

    The youth did as he was bidden and, with bowed head and sorrowful step,
    accompanied the others, walking beside Will Scarlet. So they wended
    their way through the forest. The bright light faded from the sky and
    a glimmering gray fell over all things. From the deeper recesses of the
    forest the strange whispering sounds of night-time came to the ear; all
    else was silent, saving only for the rattling of their footsteps amid
    the crisp, dry leaves of the last winter. At last a ruddy glow shone
    before them here and there through the trees; a little farther and they
    came to the open glade, now bathed in the pale moonlight. In the center
    of the open crackled a great fire, throwing a red glow on all around. At
    the fire were roasting juicy steaks of venison, pheasants, capons, and
    fresh fish from the river. All the air was filled with the sweet smell
    of good things cooking.

    The little band made its way across the glade, many yeomen turning with
    curious looks and gazing after them, but none speaking or questioning
    them. So, with Will Scarlet upon one side and Will Stutely upon the
    other, the stranger came to where Robin Hood sat on a seat of moss under
    the greenwood tree, with Little John standing beside him.

    "Good even, fair friend," said Robin Hood, rising as the other drew
    near. "And hast thou come to feast with me this day?"

    "Alas! I know not," said the lad, looking around him with dazed eyes,
    for he was bewildered with all that he saw. "Truly, I know not whether I
    be in a dream," said he to himself in a low voice.

    "Nay, marry," quoth Robin, laughing, "thou art awake, as thou wilt
    presently find, for a fine feast is a-cooking for thee. Thou art our
    honored guest this day."

    Still the young stranger looked about him, as though in a dream.
    Presently he turned to Robin. "Methinks," said he, "I know now where I
    am and what hath befallen me. Art not thou the great Robin Hood?"

    "Thou hast hit the bull's eye," quoth Robin, clapping him upon the
    shoulder. "Men hereabouts do call me by that name. Sin' thou knowest me,
    thou knowest also that he who feasteth with me must pay his reckoning. I
    trust thou hast a full purse with thee, fair stranger."

    "Alas!" said the stranger, "I have no purse nor no money either, saving
    only the half of a sixpence, the other half of which mine own dear
    love doth carry in her bosom, hung about her neck by a strand of silken
    thread."

    At this speech a great shout of laughter went up from those around,
    whereat the poor boy looked as he would die of shame; but Robin Hood
    turned sharply to Will Stutely. "Why, how now," quoth he, "is this the
    guest that thou hast brought us to fill our purse? Methinks thou hast
    brought but a lean cock to the market."

    "Nay, good master," answered Will Stutely, grinning, "he is no guest of
    mine; it was Will Scarlet that brought him thither."

    Then up spoke Will Scarlet, and told how they had found the lad in
    sorrow, and how he had brought him to Robin, thinking that he might
    perchance aid him in his trouble. Then Robin Hood turned to the youth,
    and, placing his hand upon the other's shoulder, held him off at arm's
    length, scanning his face closely.

    "A young face," quoth he in a low voice, half to himself, "a kind face,
    a good face. 'Tis like a maiden's for purity, and, withal, the fairest
    that e'er mine eyes did see; but, if I may judge fairly by thy looks,
    grief cometh to young as well as to old." At these words, spoken so
    kindly, the poor lad's eyes brimmed up with tears. "Nay, nay," said
    Robin hastily, "cheer up, lad; I warrant thy case is not so bad that it
    cannot be mended. What may be thy name?"

    "Allen a Dale is my name, good master."

    "Allen a Dale," repeated Robin, musing. "Allen a Dale. It doth seem to
    me that the name is not altogether strange to mine ears. Yea, surely
    thou art the minstrel of whom we have been hearing lately, whose voice
    so charmeth all men. Dost thou not come from the Dale of Rotherstream,
    over beyond Stavely?"

    "Yea, truly," answered Allan, "I do come thence."

    "How old art thou, Allan?" said Robin.

    "I am but twenty years of age."

    "Methinks thou art overyoung to be perplexed with trouble," quoth Robin
    kindly; then, turning to the others, he cried, "Come, lads, busk ye and
    get our feast ready; only thou, Will Scarlet, and thou, Little John,
    stay here with me."

    Then, when the others had gone, each man about his business, Robin
    turned once more to the youth. "Now, lad," said he, "tell us thy
    troubles, and speak freely. A flow of words doth ever ease the heart
    of sorrows; it is like opening the waste weir when the mill dam is
    overfull. Come, sit thou here beside me, and speak at thine ease."

    Then straightway the youth told the three yeomen all that was in his
    heart; at first in broken words and phrases, then freely and with
    greater ease when he saw that all listened closely to what he said.
    So he told them how he had come from York to the sweet vale of Rother,
    traveling the country through as a minstrel, stopping now at castle, now
    at hall, and now at farmhouse; how he had spent one sweet evening in a
    certain broad, low farmhouse, where he sang before a stout franklin and
    a maiden as pure and lovely as the first snowdrop of spring; how he had
    played and sung to her, and how sweet Ellen o' the Dale had listened to
    him and had loved him. Then, in a low, sweet voice, scarcely louder than
    a whisper, he told how he had watched for her and met her now and then
    when she went abroad, but was all too afraid in her sweet presence to
    speak to her, until at last, beside the banks of Rother, he had spoken
    of his love, and she had whispered that which had made his heartstrings
    quiver for joy. Then they broke a sixpence between them, and vowed to be
    true to one another forever.

    Next he told how her father had discovered what was a-doing, and had
    taken her away from him so that he never saw her again, and his heart
    was sometimes like to break; how this morn, only one short month and a
    half from the time that he had seen her last, he had heard and knew
    it to be so, that she was to marry old Sir Stephen of Trent, two days
    hence, for Ellen's father thought it would be a grand thing to have his
    daughter marry so high, albeit she wished it not; nor was it wonder
    that a knight should wish to marry his own sweet love, who was the most
    beautiful maiden in all the world.

    To all this the yeomen listened in silence, the clatter of many voices,
    jesting and laughing, sounding around them, and the red light of the
    fire shining on their faces and in their eyes. So simple were the
    poor boy's words, and so deep his sorrow, that even Little John felt a
    certain knotty lump rise in his throat.

    "I wonder not," said Robin, after a moment's silence, "that thy true
    love loved thee, for thou hast surely a silver cross beneath thy tongue,
    even like good Saint Francis, that could charm the birds of the air by
    his speech."

    "By the breath of my body," burst forth Little John, seeking to cover
    his feelings with angry words, "I have a great part of a mind to go
    straightway and cudgel the nasty life out of the body of that same vile
    Sir Stephen. Marry, come up, say I - what a plague - does an old weazen
    think that tender lasses are to be bought like pullets o' a market day?
    Out upon him! - I - but no matter, only let him look to himself."

    Then up spoke Will Scarlet. "Methinks it seemeth but ill done of
    the lass that she should so quickly change at others' bidding, more
    especially when it cometh to the marrying of a man as old as this same
    Sir Stephen. I like it not in her, Allan."

    "Nay," said Allan hotly, "thou dost wrong her. She is as soft and gentle
    as a stockdove. I know her better than anyone in all the world. She may
    do her father's bidding, but if she marries Sir Stephen, her heart will
    break and she will die. My own sweet dear, I - " He stopped and shook his
    head, for he could say nothing further.

    While the others were speaking, Robin Hood had been sunk in thought.
    "Methinks I have a plan might fit thy case, Allan," said he. "But tell
    me first, thinkest thou, lad, that thy true love hath spirit enough
    to marry thee were ye together in church, the banns published, and the
    priest found, even were her father to say her nay?"

    "Ay, marry would she," cried Allan eagerly.

    "Then, if her father be the man that I take him to be, I will undertake
    that he shall give you both his blessing as wedded man and wife, in the
    place of old Sir Stephen, and upon his wedding morn. But stay, now I
    bethink me, there is one thing reckoned not upon - the priest. Truly,
    those of the cloth do not love me overmuch, and when it comes to
    doing as I desire in such a matter, they are as like as not to prove
    stiff-necked. As to the lesser clergy, they fear to do me a favor
    because of abbot or bishop.

    "Nay," quoth Will Scarlet, laughing, "so far as that goeth, I know of a
    certain friar that, couldst thou but get on the soft side of him, would
    do thy business even though Pope Joan herself stood forth to ban him. He
    is known as the Curtal Friar of Fountain Abbey, and dwelleth in Fountain
    Dale."

    "But," quoth Robin, "Fountain Abbey is a good hundred miles from here.
    An we would help this lad, we have no time to go thither and back before
    his true love will be married. Nought is to be gained there, coz."

    "Yea," quoth Will Scarlet, laughing again, "but this Fountain Abbey is
    not so far away as the one of which thou speakest, uncle. The Fountain
    Abbey of which I speak is no such rich and proud place as the other,
    but a simple little cell; yet, withal, as cosy a spot as ever stout
    anchorite dwelled within. I know the place well, and can guide thee
    thither, for, though it is a goodly distance, yet methinks a stout pair
    of legs could carry a man there and back in one day."

    "Then give me thy hand, Allan," cried Robin, "and let me tell thee, I
    swear by the bright hair of Saint AElfrida that this time two days hence
    Ellen a Dale shall be thy wife. I will seek this same Friar of Fountain
    Abbey tomorrow day, and I warrant I will get upon the soft side of him,
    even if I have to drub one soft."

    At this Will Scarlet laughed again. "Be not too sure of that, good
    uncle," quoth he, "nevertheless, from what I know of him, I think this
    Curtal Friar will gladly join two such fair lovers, more especially if
    there be good eating and drinking afoot thereafter."

    But now one of the band came to say that the feast was spread upon
    the grass; so, Robin leading the way, the others followed to where
    the goodly feast was spread. Merry was the meal. Jest and story passed
    freely, and all laughed till the forest rang again. Allan laughed with
    the rest, for his cheeks were flushed with the hope that Robin Hood had
    given him.

    At last the feast was done, and Robin Hood turned to Allan, who sat
    beside him. "Now, Allan," quoth he, "so much has been said of thy
    singing that we would fain have a taste of thy skill ourselves. Canst
    thou not give us something?"

    "Surely," answered Allan readily; for he was no third-rate songster
    that must be asked again and again, but said "yes" or "no" at the first
    bidding; so, taking up his harp, he ran his fingers lightly over the
    sweetly sounding strings, and all was hushed about the cloth. Then,
    backing his voice with sweet music on his harp, he sang:


    MAY ELLEN'S WEDDING

    (Giving an account of how she was beloved by a fairy prince, who took
    her to his own home.)

         "_May Ellen sat beneath a thorn
         And in a shower around
         The blossoms fell at every breeze
         Like snow upon the ground,
         And in a lime tree near was heard
         The sweet song of a strange, wild bird.

         "O sweet, sweet, sweet, O piercing sweet,
         O lingering sweet the strain!
         May Ellen's heart within her breast
         Stood still with blissful pain:
         And so, with listening, upturned face,
         She sat as dead in that fair place.

         "'Come down from out the blossoms, bird!
         Come down from out the tree,
         And on my heart I'll let thee lie,
         And love thee tenderly!'
         Thus cried May Ellen, soft and low,
         From where the hawthorn shed its snow.

         "Down dropped the bird on quivering wing,
         From out the blossoming tree,
         And nestled in her snowy breast.
         'My love! my love!' cried she;
         Then straightway home, 'mid sun and flower,
         She bare him to her own sweet bower.

         "The day hath passed to mellow night,
         The moon floats o'er the lea,
         And in its solemn, pallid light
         A youth stands silently:
         A youth of beauty strange and rare,
         Within May Ellen's bower there.

         "He stood where o'er the pavement cold
         The glimmering moonbeams lay.
         May Ellen gazed with wide, scared eyes,
         Nor could she turn away,
         For, as in mystic dreams we see
         A spirit, stood he silently.

         "All in a low and breathless voice,
         'Whence comest thou?' said she;
         'Art thou the creature of a dream,
         Or a vision that I see?'
         Then soft spake he, as night winds shiver
         Through straining reeds beside the river.

         "'I came, a bird on feathered wing,
         From distant Faeryland
         Where murmuring waters softly sing
         Upon the golden strand,
         Where sweet trees are forever green;
         And there my mother is the queen.'

         "No more May Ellen leaves her bower
         To grace the blossoms fair;
         But in the hushed and midnight hour
         They hear her talking there,
         Or, when the moon is shining white,
         They hear her singing through the night.

         "'Oh, don thy silks and jewels fine,'
         May Ellen's mother said,
         'For hither comes the Lord of Lyne
         And thou this lord must wed.'
         May Ellen said, 'It may not be.
         He ne'er shall find his wife in me.'

         "Up spoke her brother, dark and grim:
         'Now by the bright blue sky,
         E'er yet a day hath gone for him
         Thy wicked bird shall die!
         For he hath wrought thee bitter harm,
         By some strange art or cunning charm.'

         "Then, with a sad and mournful song,
         Away the bird did fly,
         And o'er the castle eaves, and through
         The gray and windy sky.
         'Come forth!' then cried the brother grim,
         'Why dost thou gaze so after him?'

         "It is May Ellen's wedding day,
         The sky is blue and fair,
         And many a lord and lady gay
         In church are gathered there.
         The bridegroom was Sir Hugh the Bold,
         All clad in silk and cloth of gold.

         "In came the bride in samite white
         With a white wreath on her head;
         Her eyes were fixed with a glassy look,
         Her face was as the dead,
         And when she stood among the throng,
         She sang a wild and wondrous song.

         "Then came a strange and rushing sound
         Like the coming wind doth bring,
         And in the open windows shot
         Nine swans on whistling wing,
         And high above the heads they flew,
         In gleaming fight the darkness through.

         "Around May Ellen's head they flew
         In wide and windy fight,
         And three times round the circle drew.
         The guests shrank in affright,
         And the priest beside the altar there,
         Did cross himself with muttered prayer.

         "But the third time they flew around,
         Fair Ellen straight was gone,
         And in her place, upon the ground,
         There stood a snow-white swan.
         Then, with a wild and lovely song,
         It joined the swift and winged throng.

         "There's ancient men at weddings been,
         For sixty years and more,
         But such a wondrous wedding day,
         They never saw before.
         But none could check and none could stay,
         The swans that bore the bride away_."

    Not a sound broke the stillness when Allan a Dale had done, but all sat
    gazing at the handsome singer, for so sweet was his voice and the music
    that each man sat with bated breath, lest one drop more should come and
    he should lose it.

    "By my faith and my troth," quoth Robin at last, drawing a deep breath,
    "lad, thou art - Thou must not leave our company, Allan! Wilt thou not
    stay with us here in the sweet green forest? Truly, I do feel my heart
    go out toward thee with great love."

    Then Allan took Robin's hand and kissed it. "I will stay with thee
    always, dear master," said he, "for never have I known such kindness as
    thou hast shown me this day."

    Then Will Scarlet stretched forth his hand and shook Allan's in token
    of fellowship, as did Little John likewise. And thus the famous Allan a
    Dale became one of Robin Hood's band.




    Robin Hood Seeks the Curtal Friar

    THE STOUT YEOMEN of Sherwood Forest were ever early risers of a morn,
    more especially when the summertime had come, for then in the freshness
    of the dawn the dew was always the brightest, and the song of the small
    birds the sweetest.

    Quoth Robin, "Now will I go to seek this same Friar of Fountain Abbey of
    whom we spake yesternight, and I will take with me four of my good men,
    and these four shall be Little John, Will Scarlet, David of Doncaster,
    and Arthur a Bland. Bide the rest of you here, and Will Stutely shall be
    your chief while I am gone." Then straightway Robin Hood donned a fine
    steel coat of chain mail, over which he put on a light jacket of Lincoln
    green. Upon his head he clapped a steel cap, and this he covered by one
    of soft white leather, in which stood a nodding cock's plume. By his
    side he hung a good broadsword of tempered steel, the bluish blade
    marked all over with strange figures of dragons, winged women, and what
    not. A gallant sight was Robin so arrayed, I wot, the glint of steel
    showing here and there as the sunlight caught brightly the links of
    polished mail that showed beneath his green coat.

    So, having arrayed himself, he and the four yeomen set forth upon their
    way, Will Scarlet taking the lead, for he knew better than the others
    whither to go. Thus, mile after mile, they strode along, now across a
    brawling stream, now along a sunlit road, now adown some sweet forest
    path, over which the trees met in green and rustling canopy, and at the
    end of which a herd of startled deer dashed away, with rattle of leaves
    and crackle of branches. Onward they walked with song and jest and
    laughter till noontide was passed, when at last they came to the banks
    of a wide, glassy, and lily-padded stream. Here a broad, beaten path
    stretched along beside the banks, on which path labored the horses that
    tugged at the slow-moving barges, laden with barley meal or what not,
    from the countryside to the many-towered town. But now, in the hot
    silence of the midday, no horse was seen nor any man besides themselves.
    Behind them and before them stretched the river, its placid bosom
    ruffled here and there by the purple dusk of a small breeze.

    "Now, good uncle," quoth Will Scarlet at last, when they had walked for
    a long time beside this sweet, bright river, "just beyond yon bend ahead
    of us is a shallow ford which in no place is deeper than thy mid-thigh,
    and upon the other side of the stream is a certain little hermitage
    hidden amidst the bosky tangle of the thickets wherein dwelleth the
    Friar of Fountain Dale. Thither will I lead thee, for I know the way;
    albeit it is not overhard to find."

    "Nay," quoth jolly Robin, stopping suddenly, "had I thought that I
    should have had to wade water, even were it so crystal a stream as this,
    I had donned other clothes than I have upon me. But no matter now, for
    after all a wetting will not wash the skin away, and what must be, must.
    But bide ye here, lads, for I would enjoy this merry adventure alone.
    Nevertheless, listen well, and if ye hear me sound upon my bugle horn,
    come quickly." So saying, he turned and left them, striding onward
    alone.

    Robin had walked no farther than where the bend of the road hid his
    good men from his view, when he stopped suddenly, for he thought that
    he heard voices. He stood still and listened, and presently heard words
    passed back and forth betwixt what seemed to be two men, and yet the two
    voices were wondrously alike. The sound came from over behind the bank,
    that here was steep and high, dropping from the edge of the road a half
    a score of feet to the sedgy verge of the river.

    "'Tis strange," muttered Robin to himself after a space, when the voices
    had ceased their talking, "surely there be two people that spoke the one
    to the other, and yet methinks their voices are mightily alike. I make
    my vow that never have I heard the like in all my life before. Truly, if
    this twain are to be judged by their voices, no two peas were ever more
    alike. I will look into this matter." So saying, he came softly to the
    river bank and laying him down upon the grass, peered over the edge and
    down below.

    All was cool and shady beneath the bank. A stout osier grew, not
    straight upward, but leaning across the water, shadowing the spot with
    its soft foliage. All around grew a mass of feathery ferns such as hide
    and nestle in cool places, and up to Robin's nostrils came the tender
    odor of the wild thyme, that loves the moist verges of running streams.
    Here, with his broad back against the rugged trunk of the willow tree,
    and half hidden by the soft ferns around him, sat a stout, brawny
    fellow, but no other man was there. His head was as round as a ball, and
    covered with a mat of close-clipped, curly black hair that grew low down
    on his forehead. But his crown was shorn as smooth as the palm of one's
    hand, which, together with his loose robe, cowl, and string of beads,
    showed that which his looks never would have done, that he was a friar.
    His cheeks were as red and shining as a winter crab, albeit they were
    nearly covered over with a close curly black beard, as were his chin
    and upper lip likewise. His neck was thick like that of a north country
    bull, and his round head closely set upon shoulders e'en a match for
    those of Little John himself. Beneath his bushy black brows danced a
    pair of little gray eyes that could not stand still for very drollery
    of humor. No man could look into his face and not feel his heartstrings
    tickled by the merriment of their look. By his side lay a steel cap,
    which he had laid off for the sake of the coolness to his crown. His
    legs were stretched wide apart, and betwixt his knees he held a great
    pasty compounded of juicy meats of divers kinds made savory with tender
    young onions, both meat and onions being mingled with a good rich gravy.
    In his right fist he held a great piece of brown crust at which he
    munched sturdily, and every now and then he thrust his left hand into
    the pie and drew it forth full of meat; anon he would take a mighty pull
    at a great bottle of Malmsey that lay beside him.

    "By my faith," quoth Robin to himself, "I do verily believe that this
    is the merriest feast, the merriest wight, the merriest place, and the
    merriest sight in all merry England. Methought there was another here,
    but it must have been this holy man talking to himself."

    So Robin lay watching the Friar, and the Friar, all unknowing that he
    was so overlooked, ate his meal placidly. At last he was done, and,
    having first wiped his greasy hands upon the ferns and wild thyme (and
    sweeter napkin ne'er had king in all the world), he took up his
    flask and began talking to himself as though he were another man, and
    answering himself as though he were somebody else.

    "Dear lad, thou art the sweetest fellow in all the world, I do love thee
    as a lover loveth his lass. La, thou dost make me shamed to speak so to
    me in this solitary place, no one being by, and yet if thou wilt have me
    say so, I do love thee as thou lovest me. Nay then, wilt thou not take a
    drink of good Malmsey? After thee, lad, after thee. Nay, I beseech thee,
    sweeten the draught with thy lips (here he passed the flask from his
    right hand to his left). An thou wilt force it on me so, I must needs
    do thy bidding, yet with the more pleasure do I so as I drink thy very
    great health (here he took a long, deep draught). And now, sweet lad,
    'tis thy turn next (here he passed the bottle from his left hand back
    again to his right). I take it, sweet chuck, and here's wishing thee as
    much good as thou wishest me." Saying this, he took another draught, and
    truly he drank enough for two.

    All this time merry Robin lay upon the bank and listened, while his
    stomach so quaked with laughter that he was forced to press his palm
    across his mouth to keep it from bursting forth; for, truly, he would
    not have spoiled such a goodly jest for the half of Nottinghamshire.

    Having gotten his breath from his last draught, the Friar began talking
    again in this wise: "Now, sweet lad, canst thou not sing me a song? La,
    I know not, I am but in an ill voice this day; prythee ask me not; dost
    thou not hear how I croak like a frog? Nay, nay, thy voice is as sweet
    as any bullfinch; come, sing, I prythee, I would rather hear thee sing
    than eat a fair feast. Alas, I would fain not sing before one that
    can pipe so well and hath heard so many goodly songs and ballads,
    ne'ertheless, an thou wilt have it so, I will do my best. But now
    methinks that thou and I might sing some fair song together; dost thou
    not know a certain dainty little catch called 'The Loving Youth and the
    Scornful Maid'? Why, truly, methinks I have heard it ere now. Then dost
    thou not think that thou couldst take the lass's part if I take the
    lad's? I know not but I will try; begin thou with the lad and I will
    follow with the lass."

    Then, singing first with a voice deep and gruff, and anon in one high
    and squeaking, he blithely trolled the merry catch of


    THE LOVING YOUTH AND THE SCORNFUL MAID

         "_Ah, it's wilt thou come with me, my love?
         And it's wilt thou, love, be mine?
         For I will give unto thee, my love,
         Gay knots and ribbons so fine.
         I'll woo thee, love, on my bended knee,
         And I'll pipe sweet songs to none but thee.
         Then it's hark! hark! hark!
         To the winged lark
         And it's hark to the cooing dove!
         And the bright daffodil
         Groweth down by the rill,
         So come thou and be my love.

         SHE
         "Now get thee away, young man so fine;
         Now get thee away, I say;
         For my true love shall never be thine,
         And so thou hadst better not stay.
         Thou art not a fine enough lad for me,
         So I'll wait till a better young man I see.
         For it's hark! hark! hark!
         To the winged lark,
         And it's hark to the cooing dove!
         And the bright daffodil
         Groweth down by the rill,
         Yet never I'll be thy love.

         HE
         "Then straight will I seek for another fair she,
         For many a maid can be found,
         And as thou wilt never have aught of me,
         By thee will I never be bound.
         For never is a blossom in the field so rare,
         But others are found that are just as fair.
         So it's hark! hark! hark!
         To the joyous lark
         And it's hark to the cooing dove!
         And the bright daffodil
         Groweth down by the rill,
         And I'll seek me another dear love.

         SHE
         "Young man, turn not so very quick away
         Another fair lass to find.
         Methinks I have spoken in haste today,
         Nor have I made up my mind,

         And if thou only wilt stay with me,
         I'll love no other, sweet lad, but thee_."

    Here Robin could contain himself no longer but burst forth into a mighty
    roar of laughter; then, the holy Friar keeping on with the song, he
    joined in the chorus, and together they sang, or, as one might say,
    bellowed:

         "_So it's hark! hark! hark!
         To the joyous lark
         And it's hark to the cooing dove!
         For the bright daffodil
         Groweth down by the rill
         And I'll be thine own true love_."

    So they sang together, for the stout Friar did not seem to have heard
    Robin's laughter, neither did he seem to know that the yeoman had joined
    in with the song, but, with eyes half closed, looking straight before
    him and wagging his round head from side to side in time to the music,
    he kept on bravely to the end, he and Robin finishing up with a mighty
    roar that might have been heard a mile. But no sooner had the last word
    been sung than the holy man seized his steel cap, clapped it on his
    head, and springing to his feet, cried in a great voice, "What spy have
    we here? Come forth, thou limb of evil, and I will carve thee into
    as fine pudding meat as e'er a wife in Yorkshire cooked of a Sunday."
    Hereupon he drew from beneath his robes a great broadsword full as stout
    as was Robin's.

    "Nay, put up thy pinking iron, friend," quoth Robin, standing up with
    the tears of laughter still on his cheeks. "Folk who have sung so
    sweetly together should not fight thereafter." Hereupon he leaped down
    the bank to where the other stood. "I tell thee, friend," said he, "my
    throat is as parched with that song as e'er a barley stubble in October.
    Hast thou haply any Malmsey left in that stout pottle?"

    "Truly," said the Friar in a glum voice, "thou dost ask thyself freely
    where thou art not bidden. Yet I trust I am too good a Christian to
    refuse any man drink that is athirst. Such as there is o't thou art
    welcome to a drink of the same." And he held the pottle out to Robin.

    Robin took it without more ado and putting it to his lips, tilted his
    head back, while that which was within said "glug!" "lug! glug!" for more
    than three winks, I wot. The stout Friar watched Robin anxiously the
    while, and when he was done took the pottle quickly. He shook it, held
    it betwixt his eyes and the light, looked reproachfully at the yeoman,
    and straightway placed it at his own lips. When it came away again there
    was nought within it.

    "Doss thou know the country hereabouts, thou good and holy man?" asked
    Robin, laughing.

    "Yea, somewhat," answered the other dryly.

    "And dost thou know of a certain spot called Fountain Abbey?"

    "Yea, somewhat."

    "Then perchance thou knowest also of a certain one who goeth by the name
    of the Curtal Friar of Fountain Abbey."

    "Yea, somewhat."

    "Well then, good fellow, holy father, or whatever thou art," quoth
    Robin, "I would know whether this same Friar is to be found upon this
    side of the river or the other."

    "That," quoth the Friar, "is a practical question upon which the cunning
    rules appertaining to logic touch not. I do advise thee to find that out
    by the aid of thine own five senses; sight, feeling, and what not."

    "I do wish much," quoth Robin, looking thoughtfully at the stout priest,
    "to cross yon ford and strive to find this same good Friar."

    "Truly," said the other piously, "it is a goodly wish on the part of one
    so young. Far be it from me to check thee in so holy a quest. Friend,
    the river is free to all."

    "Yea, good father," said Robin, "but thou seest that my clothes are of
    the finest and I fain would not get them wet. Methinks thy shoulders
    are stout and broad; couldst thou not find it in thy heart to carry me
    across?"

    "Now, by the white hand of the holy Lady of the Fountain!" burst forth
    the Friar in a mighty rage, "dost thou, thou poor puny stripling, thou
    kiss-my-lady-la poppenjay; thou - thou What shall I call thee? Dost thou
    ask me, the holy Tuck, to carry thee? Now I swear - " Here he paused
    suddenly, then slowly the anger passed from his face, and his little
    eyes twinkled once more. "But why should I not?" quoth he piously.

    "Did not the holy Saint Christopher ever carry the stranger across the
    river? And should I, poor sinner that I am, be ashamed to do likewise?
    Come with me, stranger, and I will do thy bidding in an humble frame of
    mind." So saying, he clambered up the bank, closely followed by Robin,
    and led the way to the shallow pebbly ford, chuckling to himself the
    while as though he were enjoying some goodly jest within himself.

    Having come to the ford, he girded up his robes about his loins, tucked
    his good broadsword beneath his arm, and stooped his back to take Robin
    upon it. Suddenly he straightened up. "Methinks," quoth he, "thou'lt get
    thy weapon wet. Let me tuck it beneath mine arm along with mine own."

    "Nay, good father," said Robin, "I would not burden thee with aught of
    mine but myself."

    "Dost thou think," said the Friar mildly, "that the good Saint
    Christopher would ha' sought his own ease so? Nay, give me thy tool as I
    bid thee, for I would carry it as a penance to my pride."

    Upon this, without more ado, Robin Hood unbuckled his sword from his
    side and handed it to the other, who thrust it with his own beneath his
    arm. Then once more the Friar bent his back, and, Robin having mounted
    upon it, he stepped sturdily into the water and so strode onward,
    splashing in the shoal, and breaking all the smooth surface into
    ever-widening rings. At last he reached the other side and Robin leaped
    lightly from his back.

    "Many thanks, good father," quoth he. "Thou art indeed a good and holy
    man. Prythee give me my sword and let me away, for I am in haste."

    At this the stout Friar looked upon Robin for a long time, his head
    on one side, and with a most waggish twist to his face; then he slowly
    winked his right eye. "Nay, good youth," said he gently, "I doubt not
    that thou art in haste with thine affairs, yet thou dost think nothing
    of mine. Thine are of a carnal nature; mine are of a spiritual nature,
    a holy work, so to speak; moreover, mine affairs do lie upon the other
    side of this stream. I see by thy quest of this same holy recluse that
    thou art a good young man and most reverent to the cloth. I did get wet
    coming hither, and am sadly afraid that should I wade the water again
    I might get certain cricks and pains i' the joints that would mar my
    devotions for many a day to come. I know that since I have so humbly
    done thy bidding thou wilt carry me back again. Thou seest how Saint
    Godrick, that holy hermit whose natal day this is, hath placed in my
    hands two swords and in thine never a one. Therefore be persuaded, good
    youth, and carry me back again."

    Robin Hood looked up and he looked down, biting his nether lip. Quoth
    he, "Thou cunning Friar, thou hast me fair and fast enow. Let me tell
    thee that not one of thy cloth hath so hoodwinked me in all my life
    before. I might have known from thy looks that thou wert no such holy
    man as thou didst pretend to be."

    "Nay," interrupted the Friar, "I bid thee speak not so scurrilously
    neither, lest thou mayst perchance feel the prick of an inch or so of
    blue steel."

    "Tut, tut," said Robin, "speak not so, Friar; the loser hath ever the
    right to use his tongue as he doth list. Give me my sword; I do promise
    to carry thee back straightway. Nay, I will not lift the weapon against
    thee."

    "Marry, come up," quoth the Friar, "I fear thee not, fellow. Here is thy
    skewer; and get thyself presently ready, for I would hasten back."

    So Robin took his sword again and buckled it at his side; then he bent
    his stout back and took the Friar upon it.

    Now I wot Robin Hood had a heavier load to carry in the Friar than
    the Friar had in him. Moreover he did not know the ford, so he went
    stumbling among the stones, now stepping into a deep hole, and now
    nearly tripping over a boulder, while the sweat ran down his face in
    beads from the hardness of his journey and the heaviness of his load.
    Meantime, the Friar kept digging his heels into Robin's sides and
    bidding him hasten, calling him many ill names the while. To all this
    Robin answered never a word, but, having softly felt around till he
    found the buckle of the belt that held the Friar's sword, he worked
    slyly at the fastenings, seeking to loosen them. Thus it came about
    that, by the time he had reached the other bank with his load, the
    Friar's sword belt was loose albeit he knew it not; so when Robin stood
    on dry land and the Friar leaped from his back, the yeoman gripped hold
    of the sword so that blade, sheath, and strap came away from the holy
    man, leaving him without a weapon.

    "Now then," quoth merry Robin, panting as he spake and wiping the sweat
    from his brow, "I have thee, fellow. This time that same saint of whom
    thou didst speak but now hath delivered two swords into my hand and hath
    stripped thine away from thee. Now if thou dost not carry me back, and
    that speedily, I swear I will prick thy skin till it is as full of holes
    as a slashed doublet."

    The good Friar said not a word for a while, but he looked at Robin with
    a grim look. "Now," said he at last, "I did think that thy wits were of
    the heavy sort and knew not that thou wert so cunning. Truly, thou hast
    me upon the hip. Give me my sword, and I promise not to draw it against
    thee save in self-defense; also, I promise to do thy bidding and take
    thee upon my back and carry thee."

    So jolly Robin gave him his sword again, which the Friar buckled to
    his side, and this time looked to it that it was more secure in its
    fastenings; then tucking up his robes once more, he took Robin Hood upon
    his back and without a word stepped into the water, and so waded on in
    silence while Robin sat laughing upon his back. At last he reached the
    middle of the ford where the water was deepest. Here he stopped for
    a moment, and then, with a sudden lift of his hand and heave of his
    shoulders, fairly shot Robin over his head as though he were a sack of
    grain.

    Down went Robin into the water with a mighty splash. "There," quoth the
    holy man, calmly turning back again to the shore, "let that cool thy hot
    spirit, if it may."

    Meantime, after much splashing, Robin had gotten to his feet and stood
    gazing about him all bewildered, the water running from him in pretty
    little rills. At last he shot the water out of his ears and spat some
    out of his mouth, and, gathering his scattered wits together, saw the
    stout Friar standing on the bank and laughing. Then, I wot, was Robin
    Hood a mad man. "Stay, thou villain!" roared he, "I am after thee
    straight, and if I do not carve thy brawn for thee this day, may I never
    lift finger again!" So saying, he dashed, splashing, to the bank.

    "Thou needst not hasten thyself unduly," quoth the stout Friar. "Fear
    not; I will abide here, and if thou dost not cry 'Alack-a-day' ere long
    time is gone, may I never more peep through the brake at a fallow deer."

    And now Robin, having reached the bank, began, without more ado, to roll
    up his sleeves above his wrists. The Friar, also, tucked his robes more
    about him, showing a great, stout arm on which the muscles stood out
    like humps of an aged tree. Then Robin saw, what he had not wotted of
    before, that the Friar had also a coat of chain mail beneath his gown.

    "Look to thyself," cried Robin, drawing his good sword.

    "Ay, marry," quoth the Friar, who held his already in his hand. So,
    without more ado, they came together, and thereupon began a fierce and
    mighty battle. Right and left, and up and down and back and forth they
    fought. The swords flashed in the sun and then met with a clash that
    sounded far and near. I wot this was no playful bout at quarterstaff,
    but a grim and serious fight of real earnest. Thus they strove for an
    hour or more, pausing every now and then to rest, at which times each
    looked at the other with wonder, and thought that never had he seen so
    stout a fellow; then once again they would go at it more fiercely than
    ever. Yet in all this time neither had harmed the other nor caused his
    blood to flow. At last merry Robin cried, "Hold thy hand, good friend!"
    whereupon both lowered their swords.

    "Now I crave a boon ere we begin again," quoth Robin, wiping the sweat
    from his brow; for they had striven so long that he began to think that
    it would be an ill-done thing either to be smitten himself or to smite
    so stout and brave a fellow.

    "What wouldst thou have of me?" asked the Friar.

    "Only this," quoth Robin; "that thou wilt let me blow thrice upon my
    bugle horn."

    The Friar bent his brows and looked shrewdly at Robin Hood. "Now I
    do verily think that thou hast some cunning trick in this," quoth
    he. "Ne'ertheless, I fear thee not, and will let thee have thy wish,
    providing thou wilt also let me blow thrice upon this little whistle."

    "With all my heart," quoth Robin, "so, here goes for one." So saying,
    he raised his silver horn to his lips and blew thrice upon it, clear and
    high.

    Meantime, the Friar stood watching keenly for what might come to pass,
    holding in his fingers the while a pretty silver whistle, such as
    knights use for calling their hawks back to their wrists, which whistle
    always hung at his girdle along with his rosary.

    Scarcely had the echo of the last note of Robin's bugle come winding
    back from across the river, when four tall men in Lincoln green came
    running around the bend of the road, each with a bow in his hand and an
    arrow ready nocked upon the string.

    "Ha! Is it thus, thou traitor knave!" cried the Friar. "Then, marry,
    look to thyself!" So saying, he straightway clapped the hawk's whistle
    to his lips and blew a blast that was both loud and shrill. And now
    there came a crackling of the bushes that lined the other side of the
    road, and presently forth from the covert burst four great, shaggy
    hounds. "At 'em, Sweet Lips! At 'em, Bell Throat! At 'em, Beauty! At
    'em, Fangs!" cried the Friar, pointing at Robin.

    And now it was well for that yeoman that a tree stood nigh him beside
    the road, else had he had an ill chance of it. Ere one could say "Gaffer
    Downthedale" the hounds were upon him, and he had only time to drop his
    sword and leap lightly into the tree, around which the hounds gathered,
    looking up at him as though he were a cat on the eaves. But the Friar
    quickly called off his dogs. "At 'em!" cried he, pointing down the road
    to where the yeomen were standing stock still with wonder of what they
    saw. As the hawk darts down upon its quarry, so sped the four dogs at
    the yeomen; but when the four men saw the hounds so coming, all with one
    accord, saving only Will Scarlet, drew each man his goose feather to his
    ear and let fly his shaft.

    And now the old ballad telleth of a wondrous thing that happened, for
    thus it says, that each dog so shot at leaped lightly aside, and as the
    arrow passed him whistling, caught it in his mouth and bit it in twain.
    Now it would have been an ill day for these four good fellows had not
    Will Scarlet stepped before the others and met the hounds as they came
    rushing. "Why, how now, Fangs!" cried he sternly. "Down, Beauty! Down,
    sirrah! What means this?"

    At the sound of his voice each dog shrank back quickly and then
    straightway came to him and licked his hands and fawned upon him, as
    is the wont of dogs that meet one they know. Then the four yeomen came
    forward, the hounds leaping around Will Scarlet joyously. "Why, how
    now!" cried the stout Friar, "what means this? Art thou wizard to turn
    those wolves into lambs? Ha!" cried he, when they had come still nearer,
    "can I trust mine eyes? What means it that I see young Master William
    Gamwell in such company?"

    "Nay, Tuck," said the young man, as the four came forward to where Robin
    was now clambering down from the tree in which he had been roosting, he
    having seen that all danger was over for the time; "nay, Tuck, my name
    is no longer Will Gamwell, but Will Scarlet; and this is my good uncle,
    Robin Hood, with whom I am abiding just now."

    "Truly, good master," said the Friar, looking somewhat abashed and
    reaching out his great palm to Robin, "I ha' oft heard thy name both
    sung and spoken of, but I never thought to meet thee in battle. I crave
    thy forgiveness, and do wonder not that I found so stout a man against
    me."

    "Truly, most holy father," said Little John, "I am more thankful than
    e'er I was in all my life before that our good friend Scarlet knew thee
    and thy dogs. I tell thee seriously that I felt my heart crumble away
    from me when I saw my shaft so miss its aim, and those great beasts of
    thine coming straight at me."

    "Thou mayst indeed be thankful, friend," said the Friar gravely. "But,
    Master Will, how cometh it that thou dost now abide in Sherwood?"

    "Why, Tuck, dost thou not know of my ill happening with my father's
    steward?" answered Scarlet.

    "Yea, truly, yet I knew not that thou wert in hiding because of it.
    Marry, the times are all awry when a gentleman must lie hidden for so
    small a thing."

    "But we are losing time," quoth Robin, "and I have yet to find that same
    Curtal Friar."

    "Why, uncle, thou hast not far to go," said Will Scarlet, pointing to
    the Friar, "for there he stands beside thee."

    "How?" quoth Robin, "art thou the man that I have been at such pains to
    seek all day, and have got such a ducking for?"

    "Why, truly," said the Friar demurely, "some do call me the Curtal Friar
    of Fountain Dale; others again call me in jest the Abbot of Fountain
    Abbey; others still again call me simple Friar Tuck."

    "I like the last name best," quoth Robin, "for it doth slip more glibly
    off the tongue. But why didst thou not tell me thou wert he I sought,
    instead of sending me searching for black moonbeams?"

    "Why, truly, thou didst not ask me, good master," quoth stout Tuck; "but
    what didst thou desire of me?"

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "the day groweth late, and we cannot stand longer
    talking here. Come back with us to Sherwood, and I will unfold all to
    thee as we travel along."

    So, without tarrying longer, they all departed, with the stout dogs at
    their heels, and wended their way back to Sherwood again; but it was
    long past nightfall ere they reached the greenwood tree.

    Now listen, for next I will tell how Robin Hood compassed the happiness
    of two young lovers, aided by the merry Friar Tuck of Fountain Dale.




    Robin Hood Compasses a Marriage

    AND NOW had come the morning when fair Ellen was to be married, and on
    which merry Robin had sworn that Allan a Dale should, as it were, eat
    out of the platter that had been filled for Sir Stephen of Trent. Up
    rose Robin Hood, blithe and gay, up rose his merry men one and all, and
    up rose last of all stout Friar Tuck, winking the smart of sleep from
    out his eyes. Then, while the air seemed to brim over with the song of
    many birds, all blended together and all joying in the misty morn, each
    man raved face and hands in the leaping brook, and so the day began.

    "Now," quoth Robin, when they had broken their fast, and each man had
    eaten his fill, "it is time for us to set forth upon the undertaking
    that we have in hand for today. I will choose me one score of my good
    men to go with me, for I may need aid; and thou, Will Scarlet, wilt
    abide here and be the chief while I am gone." Then searching through
    all the band, each man of whom crowded forward eager to be chosen, Robin
    called such as he wished by name, until he had a score of stout fellows,
    the very flower of his yeomanrie. Besides Little John and Will Stutely
    were nigh all those famous lads of whom I have already told you. Then,
    while those so chosen ran leaping, full of joy, to arm themselves with
    bow and shaft and broadsword, Robin Hood stepped aside into the covert,
    and there donned a gay, beribboned coat such as might have been worn
    by some strolling minstrel, and slung a harp across his shoulder, the
    better to carry out that part.

    All the band stared and many laughed, for never had they seen their
    master in such a fantastic guise before.

    "Truly," quoth Robin, holding up his arms and looking down at himself,
    "I do think it be somewhat of a gay, gaudy, grasshopper dress; but it
    is a pretty thing for all that, and doth not ill befit the turn of my
    looks, albeit I wear it but for the nonce. But stay, Little John, here
    are two bags that I would have thee carry in thy pouch for the sake of
    safekeeping. I can ill care for them myself beneath this motley."

    "Why, master," quoth Little John, taking the bags and weighing them in
    his hand, "here is the chink of gold."

    "Well, what an there be," said Robin, "it is mine own coin and the band
    is none the worse for what is there. Come, busk ye, lads," and he turned
    quickly away. "Get ye ready straightway." Then gathering the score
    together in a close rank, in the midst of which were Allan a Dale and
    Friar Tuck, he led them forth upon their way from the forest shades.

    So they walked on for a long time till they had come out of Sherwood and
    to the vale of Rotherstream. Here were different sights from what one
    saw in the forest; hedgerows, broad fields of barley corn, pasture lands
    rolling upward till they met the sky and all dotted over with flocks of
    white sheep, hayfields whence came the odor of new-mown hay that lay in
    smooth swathes over which skimmed the swifts in rapid flight; such they
    saw, and different was it, I wot, from the tangled depths of the sweet
    woodlands, but full as fair. Thus Robin led his band, walking blithely
    with chest thrown out and head thrown back, snuffing the odors of the
    gentle breeze that came drifting from over the hayfields.

    "Truly," quoth he, "the dear world is as fair here as in the woodland
    shades. Who calls it a vale of tears? Methinks it is but the darkness in
    our minds that bringeth gloom to the world. For what sayeth that merry
    song thou singest, Little John? Is it not thus?

         "_For when my love's eyes do thine, do thine,
         And when her lips smile so rare,
         The day it is jocund and fine, so fine,
         Though let it be wet or be fair
         And when the stout ale is all flowing so fast,
         Our sorrows and troubles are things of the past_."

    "Nay," said Friar Tuck piously, "ye do think of profane things and of
    nought else; yet, truly, there be better safeguards against care and woe
    than ale drinking and bright eyes, to wit, fasting and meditation. Look
    upon me, have I the likeness of a sorrowful man?"

    At this a great shout of laughter went up from all around, for the night
    before the stout Friar had emptied twice as many canakins of ale as any
    one of all the merry men.

    "Truly," quoth Robin, when he could speak for laughter, "I should say
    that thy sorrows were about equal to thy goodliness."

    So they stepped along, talking, singing, jesting, and laughing, until
    they had come to a certain little church that belonged to the great
    estates owned by the rich Priory of Emmet. Here it was that fair Ellen
    was to be married on that morn, and here was the spot toward which the
    yeomen had pointed their toes. On the other side of the road from where
    the church stood with waving fields of barley around, ran a stone wall
    along the roadside. Over the wall from the highway was a fringe of young
    trees and bushes, and here and there the wall itself was covered by a
    mass of blossoming woodbine that filled all the warm air far and near
    with its sweet summer odor. Then straightway the yeomen leaped over the
    wall, alighting on the tall soft grass upon the other side, frightening
    a flock of sheep that lay there in the shade so that they scampered away
    in all directions. Here was a sweet cool shadow both from the wall and
    from the fair young trees and bushes, and here sat the yeomen down, and
    glad enough they were to rest after their long tramp of the morning.

    "Now," quoth Robin, "I would have one of you watch and tell me when he
    sees anyone coming to the church, and the one I choose shall be young
    David of Doncaster. So get thee upon the wall, David, and hide beneath
    the woodbine so as to keep watch."

    Accordingly young David did as he was bidden, the others stretching
    themselves at length upon the grass, some talking together and others
    sleeping. Then all was quiet save only for the low voices of those that
    talked together, and for Allan's restless footsteps pacing up and down,
    for his soul was so full of disturbance that he could not stand still,
    and saving, also, for the mellow snoring of Friar Tuck, who enjoyed his
    sleep with a noise as of one sawing soft wood very slowly. Robin lay
    upon his back and gazed aloft into the leaves of the trees, his thought
    leagues away, and so a long time passed.

    Then up spoke Robin, "Now tell us, young David of Doncaster, what dost
    thou see?"

    Then David answered, "I see the white clouds floating and I feel the
    wind a-blowing and three black crows are flying over the wold; but
    nought else do I see, good master."

    So silence fell again and another time passed, broken only as I have
    said, till Robin, growing impatient, spake again. "Now tell me, young
    David, what dost thou see by this?"

    And David answered, "I see the windmills swinging and three tall poplar
    trees swaying against the sky, and a flock of fieldfares are flying over
    the hill; but nought else do I see, good master."

    So another time passed, till at last Robin asked young David once more
    what he saw; and David said, "I hear the cuckoo singing, and I see how
    the wind makes waves in the barley field; and now over the hill to the
    church cometh an old friar, and in his hands he carries a great bunch of
    keys; and lo! Now he cometh to the church door."

    Then up rose Robin Hood and shook Friar Tuck by the shoulder. "Come,
    rouse thee, holy man!" cried he; whereupon, with much grunting, the
    stout Tuck got to his feet. "Marry, bestir thyself," quoth Robin, "for
    yonder, in the church door, is one of thy cloth. Go thou and talk to
    him, and so get thyself into the church, that thou mayst be there when
    thou art wanted; meantime, Little John, Will Stutely, and I will follow
    thee anon."

    So Friar Tuck clambered over the wall, crossed the road, and came to the
    church, where the old friar was still laboring with the great key, the
    lock being somewhat rusty and he somewhat old and feeble.

    "Hilloa, brother," quoth Tuck, "let me aid thee." So saying, he took the
    key from the other's hand and quickly opened the door with a turn of it.

    "Who art thou, good brother?" asked the old friar, in a high, wheezing
    voice. "Whence comest thou, and whither art thou going?" And he winked
    and blinked at stout Friar Tuck like an owl at the sun.

    "Thus do I answer thy questions, brother," said the other. "My name is
    Tuck, and I go no farther than this spot, if thou wilt haply but let me
    stay while this same wedding is going forward. I come from Fountain Dale
    and, in truth, am a certain poor hermit, as one may say, for I live in a
    cell beside the fountain blessed by that holy Saint Ethelrada. But, if
    I understand aught, there is to be a gay wedding here today; so, if thou
    mindest not, I would fain rest me in the cool shade within, for I would
    like to see this fine sight."

    "Truly, thou art welcome, brother," said the old man, leading the way
    within. Meantime, Robin Hood, in his guise of harper, together with
    Little John and Will Stutely, had come to the church. Robin sat him down
    on a bench beside the door, but Little John, carrying the two bags of
    gold, went within, as did Will Stutely.

    So Robin sat by the door, looking up the road and down the road to see
    who might come, till, after a time, he saw six horsemen come riding
    sedately and slowly, as became them, for they were churchmen in high
    orders. Then, when they had come nearer, Robin saw who they were, and
    knew them. The first was the Bishop of Hereford, and a fine figure he
    cut, I wot. His vestments were of the richest silk, and around his neck
    was a fair chain of beaten gold. The cap that hid his tonsure was
    of black velvet, and around the edges of it were rows of jewels that
    flashed in the sunlight, each stone being set in gold. His hose were
    of flame-colored silk, and his shoes of black velvet, the long, pointed
    toes being turned up and fastened to his knees, and on either instep was
    embroidered a cross in gold thread. Beside the Bishop rode the Prior of
    Emmet upon a mincing palfrey. Rich were his clothes also, but not so gay
    as the stout Bishop's. Behind these were two of the higher brethren of
    Emmet, and behind these again two retainers belonging to the Bishop; for
    the Lord Bishop of Hereford strove to be as like the great barons as was
    in the power of one in holy orders.

    When Robin saw this train drawing near, with flash of jewels and silk
    and jingle of silver bells on the trappings of the nags, he looked
    sourly upon them. Quoth he to himself, "Yon Bishop is overgaudy for
    a holy man. I do wonder whether his patron, who, methinks, was Saint
    Thomas, was given to wearing golden chains about his neck, silk clothing
    upon his body, and pointed shoes upon his feet; the money for all of
    which, God wot, hath been wrung from the sweat of poor tenants. Bishop,
    Bishop, thy pride may have a fall ere thou wottest of it."

    So the holy men came to the church; the Bishop and the Prior jesting and
    laughing between themselves about certain fair dames, their words more
    befitting the lips of laymen, methinks, than holy clerks. Then they
    dismounted, and the Bishop, looking around, presently caught sight of
    Robin standing in the doorway. "Hilloa, good fellow," quoth he in a
    jovial voice, "who art thou that struttest in such gay feathers?"

    "A harper am I from the north country," quoth Robin, "and I can touch
    the strings, I wot, as never another man in all merry England can do.
    Truly, good Lord Bishop, many a knight and burgher, clerk and layman,
    have danced to my music, willy-nilly, and most times greatly against
    their will; such is the magic of my harping. Now this day, my Lord
    Bishop, if I may play at this wedding, I do promise that I will cause
    the fair bride to love the man she marries with a love that shall last
    as long as that twain shall live together."

    "Ha! is it so?" cried the Bishop. "Meanest thou this in sooth?" And he
    looked keenly at Robin, who gazed boldly back again into his eyes. "Now,
    if thou wilt cause this maiden (who hath verily bewitched my poor cousin
    Stephen) thus to love the man she is to marry, as thou sayst thou canst,
    I will give thee whatsoever thou wilt ask me in due measure. Let me have
    a taste of thy skill, fellow."

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "my music cometh not without I choose, even at a
    lord bishop's bidding. In sooth, I will not play until the bride and
    bridegroom come."

    "Now, thou art a saucy varlet to speak so to my crest," quoth the
    Bishop, frowning on Robin. "Yet, I must needs bear with thee. Look,
    Prior, hither cometh our cousin Sir Stephen, and his ladylove."

    And now, around the bend of the highroad, came others, riding upon
    horses. The first of all was a tall, thin man, of knightly bearing,
    dressed all in black silk, with a black velvet cap upon his head,
    turned up with scarlet. Robin looked, and had no doubt that this was Sir
    Stephen, both because of his knightly carriage and of his gray hairs.
    Beside him rode a stout Saxon franklin, Ellen's father, Edward of
    Deirwold; behind those two came a litter borne by two horses, and
    therein was a maiden whom Robin knew must be Ellen. Behind this litter
    rode six men-at-arms, the sunlight flashing on their steel caps as they
    came jingling up the dusty road.

    So these also came to the church, and there Sir Stephen leaped from his
    horse and, coming to the litter, handed fair Ellen out therefrom. Then
    Robin Hood looked at her, and could wonder no longer how it came about
    that so proud a knight as Sir Stephen of Trent wished to marry a common
    franklin's daughter; nor did he wonder that no ado was made about the
    matter, for she was the fairest maiden that ever he had beheld. Now,
    however, she was all pale and drooping, like a fair white lily snapped
    at the stem; and so, with bent head and sorrowful look, she went within
    the church, Sir Stephen leading her by the hand.

    "Why dost thou not play, fellow?" quoth the Bishop, looking sternly at
    Robin.

    "Marry," said Robin calmly, "I will play in greater wise than Your
    Lordship thinks, but not till the right time hath come."

    Said the Bishop to himself, while he looked grimly at Robin, "When this
    wedding is gone by I will have this fellow well whipped for his saucy
    tongue and bold speech."

    And now fair Ellen and Sir Stephen stood before the altar, and the
    Bishop himself came in his robes and opened his book, whereat fair Ellen
    looked up and about her in bitter despair, like the fawn that finds the
    hounds on her haunch. Then, in all his fluttering tags and ribbons of
    red and yellow, Robin Hood strode forward. Three steps he took from the
    pillar whereby he leaned, and stood between the bride and bridegroom.

    "Let me look upon this lass," he said in a loud voice. "Why, how now!
    What have we here? Here be lilies in the cheeks, and not roses such as
    befit a bonny bride. This is no fit wedding. Thou, Sir Knight, so old,
    and she so young, and thou thinkest to make her thy wife? I tell thee it
    may not be, for thou art not her own true love."

    At this all stood amazed, and knew not where to look nor what to think
    or say, for they were all bewildered with the happening; so, while
    everyone looked at Robin as though they had been changed to stone, he
    clapped his bugle horn to his lips and blew three blasts so loud and
    clear, they echoed from floor to rafter as though they were sounded by
    the trump of doom. Then straightway Little John and Will Stutely came
    leaping and stood upon either side of Robin Hood, and quickly drew their
    broadswords, the while a mighty voice rolled over the heads of all,
    "Here be I, good master, when thou wantest me;" for it was Friar Tuck
    that so called from the organ loft.

    And now all was hubbub and noise. Stout Edward strode forward raging,
    and would have seized his daughter to drag her away, but Little John
    stepped between and thrust him back. "Stand back, old man," said he,
    "thou art a hobbled horse this day."

    "Down with the villains!" cried Sir Stephen, and felt for his sword, but
    it hung not beside him on his wedding day.

    Then the men-at-arms drew their swords, and it seemed like that blood
    would wet the stones; but suddenly came a bustle at the door and loud
    voices, steel flashed in the light, and the crash of blows sounded.
    The men-at-arms fell back, and up the aisle came leaping eighteen stout
    yeomen all clad in Lincoln green, with Allan a Dale at their head. In
    his hand he bore Robin Hood's good stout trusty bow of yew, and this he
    gave to him, kneeling the while upon one knee.

    Then up spake Edward of Deirwold in a deep voice of anger, "Is it thou,
    Allan a Dale, that hath bred all this coil in a church?"

    "Nay," quoth merry Robin, "that have I done, and I care not who knoweth
    it, for my name is Robin Hood."

    At this name a sudden silence fell. The Prior of Emmet and those that
    belonged to him gathered together like a flock of frightened sheep when
    the scent of the wolf is nigh, while the Bishop of Hereford, laying
    aside his book, crossed himself devoutly. "Now Heaven keep us this day,"
    said he, "from that evil man!"

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "I mean you no harm; but here is fair Ellen's
    betrothed husband, and she shall marry him or pain will be bred to some
    of you."

    Then up spake stout Edward in a loud and angry voice, "Now I say nay! I
    am her father, and she shall marry Sir Stephen and none other."

    Now all this time, while everything was in turmoil about him, Sir
    Stephen had been standing in proud and scornful silence. "Nay, fellow,"
    said he coldly, "thou mayst take thy daughter back again; I would
    not marry her after this day's doings could I gain all merry England
    thereby. I tell thee plainly, I loved thy daughter, old as I am, and
    would have taken her up like a jewel from the sty, yet, truly, I knew
    not that she did love this fellow, and was beloved by him. Maiden, if
    thou dost rather choose a beggarly minstrel than a high-born knight,
    take thy choice. I do feel it shame that I should thus stand talking
    amid this herd, and so I will leave you." Thus saying, he turned and,
    gathering his men about him, walked proudly down the aisle. Then all the
    yeomen were silenced by the scorn of his words. Only Friar Tuck leaned
    over the edge of the choir loft and called out to him ere he had gone,
    "Good den, Sir Knight. Thou wottest old bones must alway make room for
    young blood." Sir Stephen neither answered nor looked up, but passed out
    from the church as though he had heard nought, his men following him.

    Then the Bishop of Hereford spoke hastily, "I, too, have no business
    here, and so will depart." And he made as though he would go. But Robin
    Hood laid hold of his clothes and held him. "Stay, my Lord Bishop," said
    he, "I have yet somewhat to say to thee." The Bishop's face fell, but he
    stayed as Robin bade him, for he saw he could not go.

    Then Robin Hood turned to stout Edward of Deirwold, and said he, "Give
    thy blessing on thy daughter's marriage to this yeoman, and all will be
    well. Little John, give me the bags of gold. Look, farmer. Here are two
    hundred bright golden angels; give thy blessing, as I say, and I will
    count them out to thee as thy daughter's dower. Give not thy blessing,
    and she shall be married all the same, but not so much as a cracked
    farthing shall cross thy palm. Choose."

    Then Edward looked upon the ground with bent brows, turning the matter
    over and over in his mind; but he was a shrewd man and one, withal, that
    made the best use of a cracked pipkin; so at last he looked up and said,
    but in no joyous tone, "If the wench will go her own gait, let her go. I
    had thought to make a lady of her; yet if she chooses to be what she is
    like to be, I have nought to do with her henceforth. Ne'ertheless I will
    give her my blessing when she is duly wedded."

    "It may not be," spake up one of those of Emmet. "The banns have not
    been duly published, neither is there any priest here to marry them."

    "How sayst thou?" roared Tuck from the choir loft. "No priest? Marry,
    here stands as holy a man as thou art, any day of the week, a clerk in
    orders, I would have thee know. As for the question of banns, stumble
    not over that straw, brother, for I will publish them." So saying, he
    called the banns; and, says the old ballad, lest three times should not
    be enough, he published them nine times o'er. Then straightway he came
    down from the loft and forthwith performed the marriage service; and so
    Allan and Ellen were duly wedded.

    And now Robin counted out two hundred golden angels to Edward of
    Deirwold, and he, upon his part, gave his blessing, yet not, I wot,
    as though he meant it with overmuch good will. Then the stout yeomen
    crowded around and grasped Allan's palm, and he, holding Ellen's hand
    within his own, looked about him all dizzy with his happiness.

    Then at last jolly Robin turned to the Bishop of Hereford, who had been
    looking on at all that passed with a grim look. "My Lord Bishop," quoth
    he, "thou mayst bring to thy mind that thou didst promise me that did I
    play in such wise as to cause this fair lass to love her husband, thou
    wouldst give me whatsoever I asked in reason. I have played my play, and
    she loveth her husband, which she would not have done but for me; so
    now fulfill thy promise. Thou hast upon thee that which, methinks, thou
    wouldst be the better without; therefore, I prythee, give me that golden
    chain that hangeth about thy neck as a wedding present for this fair
    bride."

    Then the Bishop's cheeks grew red with rage and his eyes flashed. He
    looked at Robin with a fell look, but saw that in the yeoman's face
    which bade him pause. Then slowly he took the chain from about his neck
    and handed it to Robin, who flung it over Ellen's head so that it hung
    glittering about her shoulders. Then said merry Robin, "I thank thee, on
    the bride's part, for thy handsome gift, and truly thou thyself art more
    seemly without it. Now, shouldst thou ever come nigh to Sherwood I much
    hope that I shall give thee there such a feast as thou hast ne'er had in
    all thy life before."

    "May Heaven forfend!" cried the Bishop earnestly; for he knew right well
    what manner of feast it was that Robin Hood gave his guests in Sherwood
    Forest.

    But now Robin Hood gathered his men together, and, with Allan and his
    young bride in their midst, they all turned their footsteps toward the
    woodlands. On the way thither Friar Tuck came close to Robin and plucked
    him by the sleeve. "Thou dost lead a merry life, good master," quoth he,
    "but dost thou not think that it would be for the welfare of all your
    souls to have a good stout chaplain, such as I, to oversee holy matters?
    Truly, I do love this life mightily." At this merry Robin Hood laughed
    amain, and bade him stay and become one of their band if he wished.

    That night there was such a feast held in the greenwood as
    Nottinghamshire never saw before. To that feast you and I were not
    bidden, and pity it is that we were not; so, lest we should both feel
    the matter the more keenly, I will say no more about it.




    Robin Hood Aids a Sorrowful Knight

    SO PASSED the gentle springtime away in budding beauty; its silver
    showers and sunshine, its green meadows and its flowers. So, likewise,
    passed the summer with its yellow sunlight, its quivering heat and deep,
    bosky foliage, its long twilights and its mellow nights, through which
    the frogs croaked and fairy folk were said to be out on the hillsides.
    All this had passed and the time of fall had come, bringing with it its
    own pleasures and joyousness; for now, when the harvest was gathered
    home, merry bands of gleaners roamed the country about, singing along
    the roads in the daytime, and sleeping beneath the hedgerows and the
    hay-ricks at night. Now the hips burned red in the tangled thickets and
    the hews waxed black in the hedgerows, the stubble lay all crisp and
    naked to the sky, and the green leaves were fast turning russet and
    brown. Also, at this merry season, good things of the year are gathered
    in in great store. Brown ale lies ripening in the cellar, hams and
    bacon hang in the smoke-shed, and crabs are stowed away in the straw for
    roasting in the wintertime, when the north wind piles the snow in drifts
    around the gables and the fire crackles warm upon the hearth.

    So passed the seasons then, so they pass now, and so they will pass in
    time to come, while we come and go like leaves of the tree that fall and
    are soon forgotten.


    Quoth Robin Hood, snuffing the air, "Here is a fair day, Little John,
    and one that we can ill waste in idleness. Choose such men as thou dost
    need, and go thou east while I will wend to the west, and see that
    each of us bringeth back some goodly guest to dine this day beneath the
    greenwood tree."

    "Marry," cried Little John, clapping his palms together for joy, "thy
    bidding fitteth my liking like heft to blade. I'll bring thee back a
    guest this day, or come not back mine own self."

    Then they each chose such of the band as they wished, and so went forth
    by different paths from the forest.

    Now, you and I cannot go two ways at the same time while we join in
    these merry doings; so we will e'en let Little John follow his own path
    while we tuck up our skirts and trudge after Robin Hood. And here
    is good company, too; Robin Hood, Will Scarlet, Allan a Dale, Will
    Scathelock, Midge, the Miller's son, and others. A score or more of
    stout fellows had abided in the forest, with Friar Tuck, to make ready
    for the homecoming, but all the rest were gone either with Robin Hood or
    Little John.

    They traveled onward, Robin following his fancy and the others following
    Robin. Now they wended their way through an open dale with cottage and
    farm lying therein, and now again they entered woodlands once more.
    Passing by fair Mansfield Town, with its towers and battlements and
    spires all smiling in the sun, they came at last out of the forest
    lands. Onward they journeyed, through highway and byway, through
    villages where goodwives and merry lasses peeped through the casements
    at the fine show of young men, until at last they came over beyond
    Alverton in Derbyshire. By this time high noontide had come, yet they
    had met no guest such as was worth their while to take back to Sherwood;
    so, coming at last to a certain spot where a shrine stood at the
    crossing of two roads, Robin called upon them to stop, for here on
    either side was shelter of high hedgerows, behind which was good hiding,
    whence they could watch the roads at their ease, while they ate their
    midday meal. Quoth merry Robin, "Here, methinks, is good lodging, where
    peaceful folk, such as we be, can eat in quietness; therefore we will
    rest here, and see what may, perchance, fall into our luck-pot." So they
    crossed a stile and came behind a hedgerow where the mellow sunlight was
    bright and warm, and where the grass was soft, and there sat them down.
    Then each man drew from the pouch that hung beside him that which he
    had brought to eat, for a merry walk such as this had been sharpens
    the appetite till it is as keen as a March wind. So no more words were
    spoken, but each man saved his teeth for better use - munching at brown
    crust and cold meat right lustily.

    In front of them, one of the highroads crawled up the steep hill and
    then dipped suddenly over its crest, sharp-cut with hedgerow and shaggy
    grass against the sky. Over the top of the windy hill peeped the eaves
    of a few houses of the village that fell back into the valley behind;
    there, also, showed the top of a windmill, the sails slowly rising and
    dipping from behind the hill against the clear blue sky, as the light
    wind moved them with creaking and labored swing.

    So the yeomen lay behind the hedge and finished their midday meal; but
    still the time slipped along and no one came. At last, a man came slowly
    riding over the hill and down the stony road toward the spot where Robin
    and his band lay hidden. He was a good stout knight, but sorrowful of
    face and downcast of mien. His clothes were plain and rich, but no chain
    of gold, such as folk of his stand in life wore at most times, hung
    around his neck, and no jewel was about him; yet no one could mistake
    him for aught but one of proud and noble blood. His head was bowed upon
    his breast and his hands drooped limp on either side; and so he came
    slowly riding, as though sunk in sad thoughts, while even his good
    horse, the reins loose upon his neck, walked with hanging head, as
    though he shared his master's grief.

    Quoth Robin Hood, "Yon is verily a sorry-looking gallant, and doth seem
    to have donned ill-content with his jerkin this morning; nevertheless,
    I will out and talk with him, for there may be some pickings here for
    a hungry daw. Methinks his dress is rich, though he himself is so
    downcast. Bide ye here till I look into this matter." So saying, he
    arose and left them, crossed the road to the shrine, and there stood,
    waiting for the sorrowful knight to come near him. So, presently, when
    the knight came riding slowly along, jolly Robin stepped forward and
    laid his hand upon the bridle rein. "Hold, Sir Knight," quoth he. "I
    prythee tarry for a short time, for I have a few words to say to thee."

    "What art thou, friend, who dost stop a traveler in this manner upon his
    most gracious Majesty's highway?" said the Knight.

    "Marry," quoth Robin, "that is a question hard to answer. One man
    calleth me kind, another calleth me cruel; this one calleth me good
    honest fellow, and that one, vile thief. Truly, the world hath as many
    eyes to look upon a man withal as there are spots on a toad; so, with
    what pair of eyes thou regardest me lieth entirely with thine own self.
    My name is Robin Hood."

    "Truly, good Robin," said the Knight, a smile twitching at the corners
    of his mouth, "thou hast a quaint conceit. As for the pair of eyes with
    which I regard thee, I would say that they are as favorable as may be,
    for I hear much good of thee and little ill. What is thy will of me?"

    "Now, I make my vow, Sir Knight," quoth Robin, "thou hast surely learned
    thy wisdom of good Gaffer Swanthold, for he sayeth, 'Fair words are as
    easy spoke as foul, and bring good will in the stead of blows.' Now I
    will show thee the truth of this saying; for, if thou wilt go with me
    this day to Sherwood Forest, I will give thee as merry a feast as ever
    thou hadst in all thy life."

    "Thou art indeed kind," said the Knight, "but methinks thou wilt find me
    but an ill-seeming and sorrowful guest. Thou hadst best let me pass on
    my way in peace."

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "thou mightst go thine own way but for one thing,
    and that I will tell thee. We keep an inn, as it were, in the very
    depths of Sherwood, but so far from highroads and beaten paths that
    guests do not often come nigh us; so I and my friends set off merrily
    and seek them when we grow dull of ourselves. Thus the matter stands,
    Sir Knight; yet I will furthermore tell thee that we count upon our
    guests paying a reckoning."

    "I take thy meaning, friend," said the Knight gravely, "but I am not thy
    man, for I have no money by me."

    "Is it sooth?" said Robin, looking at the Knight keenly. "I can scarce
    choose but believe thee; yet, Sir Knight, there be those of thy order
    whose word is not to be trusted as much as they would have others
    believe. Thou wilt think no ill if I look for myself in this matter."
    Then, still holding the horse by the bridle rein, he put his fingers
    to his lips and blew a shrill whistle, whereupon fourscore yeomen came
    leaping over the stile and ran to where the Knight and Robin stood.
    "These," said Robin, looking upon them proudly, "are some of my merry
    men. They share and share alike with me all joys and troubles, gains and
    losses. Sir Knight, I prythee tell me what money thou hast about thee."

    For a time the Knight said not a word, but a slow red arose into his
    cheeks; at last he looked Robin in the face and said, "I know not why I
    should be ashamed, for it should be no shame to me; but, friend, I tell
    thee the truth, when I say that in my purse are ten shillings, and that
    that is every groat that Sir Richard of the Lea hath in all the wide
    world."

    When Sir Richard ended a silence fell, until at last Robin said, "And
    dost thou pledge me thy knightly word that this is all thou hast with
    thee?"

    "Yea," answered Sir Richard, "I do pledge thee my most solemn word, as a
    true knight, that it is all the money I have in the world. Nay, here is
    my purse, ye may find for yourselves the truth of what I say." And he
    held his purse out to Robin.

    "Put up thy purse, Sir Richard," quoth Robin. "Far be it from me to
    doubt the word of so gentle a knight. The proud I strive to bring low,
    but those that walk in sorrow I would aid if I could. Come, Sir Richard,
    cheer up thy heart and go with us into the greenwood. Even I may
    perchance aid thee, for thou surely knowest how the good Athelstane was
    saved by the little blind mole that digged a trench over which he that
    sought the king's life stumbled."

    "Truly, friend," said Sir Richard, "methinks thou meanest kindness in
    thine own way; nevertheless my troubles are such that it is not likely
    that thou canst cure them. But I will go with thee this day into
    Sherwood." Hereupon he turned his horse's head, and they all wended
    their way to the woodlands, Robin walking on one side of the Knight and
    Will Scarlet on the other, while the rest of the band trudged behind.

    After they had traveled thus for a time Robin Hood spake. "Sir Knight,"
    said he, "I would not trouble thee with idle questions; but dost thou
    find it in thy heart to tell me thy sorrows?"

    "Truly, Robin," quoth the Knight, "I see no reason why I should not do
    so. Thus it is: My castle and my lands are in pawn for a debt that I
    owe. Three days hence the money must be paid or else all mine estate is
    lost forever, for then it falls into the hands of the Priory of Emmet,
    and what they swallow they never give forth again."

    Quoth Robin, "I understand not why those of thy kind live in such a
    manner that all their wealth passeth from them like snow beneath the
    springtide sun."

    "Thou wrongest me, Robin," said the Knight, "for listen: I have a son
    but twenty winters old, nevertheless he has won his spurs as knight.
    Last year, on a certain evil day, the jousts were held at Chester, and
    thither my son went, as did I and my lady wife. I wot it was a proud
    time for us, for he unhorsed each knight that he tilted against. At last
    he ran a course with a certain great knight, Sir Walter of Lancaster,
    yet, though my son was so youthful, he kept his seat, albeit both spears
    were shivered to the heft; but it happened that a splinter of my boy's
    lance ran through the visor of Sir Walter's helmet and pierced through
    his eye into his brain, so that he died ere his esquire could unlace his
    helm. Now, Robin, Sir Walter had great friends at court, therefore
    his kinsmen stirred up things against my son so that, to save him from
    prison, I had to pay a ransom of six hundred pounds in gold. All might
    have gone well even yet, only that, by ins and outs and crookedness of
    laws, I was shorn like a sheep that is clipped to the quick. So it came
    that I had to pawn my lands to the Priory of Emmet for more money, and
    a hard bargain they drove with me in my hour of need. Yet I would have
    thee understand I grieve so for my lands only because of my dear lady
    wife."

    "But where is thy son now?" asked Robin, who had listened closely to all
    the Knight had said.

    "In Palestine," said Sir Richard, "battling like a brave Christian
    soldier for the cross and the holy sepulcher. Truly, England was an
    ill place for him because of Sir Walter's death and the hate of the
    Lancastrian's kinsmen."

    "Truly," said Robin, much moved, "thine is a hard lot. But tell me, what
    is owing to Emmet for thine estates?"

    "Only four hundred pounds," said Sir Richard.

    At this, Robin smote his thigh in anger. "O the bloodsuckers!" cried
    he. "A noble estate to be forfeit for four hundred pounds! But what will
    befall thee if thou dost lose thy lands, Sir Richard?"

    "It is not mine own lot that doth trouble me in that case," said the
    Knight, "but my dear lady's; for should I lose my land she will have
    to betake herself to some kinsman and there abide in charity, which,
    methinks, would break her proud heart. As for me, I will over the
    salt sea, and so to Palestine to join my son in fight for the holy
    sepulcher."

    Then up spake Will Scarlet. "But hast thou no friend that will help thee
    in thy dire need?"

    "Never a man," said Sir Richard. "While I was rich enow at home, and had
    friends, they blew great boasts of how they loved me. But when the oak
    falls in the forest the swine run from beneath it lest they should be
    smitten down also. So my friends have left me; for not only am I poor
    but I have great enemies."

    Then Robin said, "Thou sayst thou hast no friends, Sir Richard. I make
    no boast, but many have found Robin Hood a friend in their troubles.
    Cheer up, Sir Knight, I may help thee yet."

    The Knight shook his head with a faint smile, but for all that, Robin's
    words made him more blithe of heart, for in truth hope, be it never
    so faint, bringeth a gleam into darkness, like a little rushlight that
    costeth but a groat.

    The day was well-nigh gone when they came near to the greenwood tree.
    Even at a distance they saw by the number of men that Little John had
    come back with some guest, but when they came near enough, whom should
    they find but the Lord Bishop of Hereford! The good Bishop was in a fine
    stew, I wot. Up and down he walked beneath the tree like a fox caught in
    a hencoop. Behind him were three Black Friars standing close together in
    a frightened group, like three black sheep in a tempest. Hitched to the
    branches of the trees close at hand were six horses, one of them a
    barb with gay trappings upon which the Bishop was wont to ride, and the
    others laden with packs of divers shapes and kinds, one of which made
    Robin's eyes glisten, for it was a box not overlarge, but heavily bound
    with bands and ribs of iron.

    When the Bishop saw Robin and those with him come into the open he
    made as though he would have run toward the yeoman, but the fellow
    that guarded the Bishop and the three friars thrust his quarterstaff in
    front, so that his lordship was fain to stand back, though with frowning
    brow and angry speech.

    "Stay, my Lord Bishop," cried jolly Robin in a loud voice, when he saw
    what had passed, "I will come to thee with all speed, for I would rather
    see thee than any man in merry England." So saying, he quickened his
    steps and soon came to where the Bishop stood fuming.

    "How now," quoth the Bishop in a loud and angry voice, when Robin had so
    come to him, "is this the way that thou and thy band treat one so high
    in the church as I am? I and these brethren were passing peacefully
    along the highroad with our pack horses, and a half score of men to
    guard them, when up comes a great strapping fellow full seven feet high,
    with fourscore or more men back of him, and calls upon me to
    stop - me, the Lord Bishop of Hereford, mark thou! Whereupon my armed
    guards - beshrew them for cowards! - straight ran away. But look ye; not
    only did this fellow stop me, but he threatened me, saying that Robin
    Hood would strip me as bare as a winter hedge. Then, besides all this,
    he called me such vile names as 'fat priest,' 'man-eating bishop,'
    'money-gorging usurer,' and what not, as though I were no more than a
    strolling beggar or tinker."

    At this, the Bishop glared like an angry cat, while even Sir Richard
    laughed; only Robin kept a grave face. "Alas! my lord," said he, "that
    thou hast been so ill-treated by my band! I tell thee truly that we
    greatly reverence thy cloth. Little John, stand forth straightway."

    At these words Little John came forward, twisting his face into a
    whimsical look, as though he would say, "Ha' mercy upon me, good
    master." Then Robin turned to the Bishop of Hereford and said, "Was this
    the man who spake so boldly to Your Lordship?"

    "Ay, truly it was the same," said the Bishop, "a naughty fellow, I wot.

    "And didst thou, Little John," said Robin in a sad voice, "call his
    lordship a fat priest?"

    "Ay," said Little John sorrowfully.

    "And a man-eating bishop?"

    "Ay," said Little John, more sorrowfully than before.

    "And a money-gorging usurer?"

    "Ay," said Little John in so sorrowful a voice that it might have drawn
    tears from the Dragon of Wentley.

    "Alas, that these things should be!" said jolly Robin, turning to the
    Bishop, "for I have ever found Little John a truthful man."

    At this, a roar of laughter went up, whereat the blood rushed into the
    Bishop's face till it was cherry red from crown to chin; but he said
    nothing and only swallowed his words, though they well-nigh choked him.

    "Nay, my Lord Bishop," said Robin, "we are rough fellows, but I trust
    not such ill men as thou thinkest, after all. There is not a man here
    that would harm a hair of thy reverence's head. I know thou art galled
    by our jesting, but we are all equal here in the greenwood, for there
    are no bishops nor barons nor earls among us, but only men, so thou must
    share our life with us while thou dost abide here. Come, busk ye, my
    merry men, and get the feast ready. Meantime, we will show our guests
    our woodland sports."

    So, while some went to kindle the fires for roasting meats, others ran
    leaping to get their cudgels and longbows. Then Robin brought forward
    Sir Richard of the Lea. "My Lord Bishop," said he, "here is another
    guest that we have with us this day. I wish that thou mightest know
    him better, for I and all my men will strive to honor you both at this
    merrymaking."

    "Sir Richard," said the Bishop in a reproachful tone, "methinks thou and
    I are companions and fellow sufferers in this den of - " He was about to
    say "thieves," but he stopped suddenly and looked askance at Robin Hood.

    "Speak out, Bishop," quoth Robin, laughing. "We of Sherwood check not an
    easy flow of words. 'Den of thieves' thou west about to say."

    Quoth the Bishop, "Mayhap that was what I meant to say, Sir Richard; but
    this I will say, that I saw thee just now laugh at the scurrilous jests
    of these fellows. It would have been more becoming of thee, methinks, to
    have checked them with frowns instead of spurring them on by laughter."

    "I meant no harm to thee," said Sir Richard, "but a merry jest is a
    merry jest, and I may truly say I would have laughed at it had it been
    against mine own self."

    But now Robin Hood called upon certain ones of his band who spread soft
    moss upon the ground and laid deerskins thereon. Then Robin bade his
    guests be seated, and so they all three sat down, some of the chief men,
    such as Little John, Will Scarlet, Allan a Dale, and others, stretching
    themselves upon the ground near by. Then a garland was set up at the
    far end of the glade, and thereat the bowmen shot, and such shooting was
    done that day as it would have made one's heart leap to see. And all the
    while Robin talked so quaintly to the Bishop and the Knight that,
    the one forgetting his vexation and the other his troubles, they both
    laughed aloud again and again.

    Then Allan a Dale came forth and tuned his harp, and all was hushed
    around, and he sang in his wondrous voice songs of love, of war, of
    glory, and of sadness, and all listened without a movement or a sound.
    So Allan sang till the great round silver moon gleamed with its clear
    white light amid the upper tangle of the mazy branches of the trees. At
    last two fellows came to say that the feast was ready spread, so Robin,
    leading his guests with either hand, brought them to where great smoking
    dishes that sent savory smells far and near stood along the white linen
    cloth spread on the grass. All around was a glare of torches that lit
    everything up with a red light. Then, straightway sitting down, all fell
    to with noise and hubbub, the rattling of platters blending with the
    sound of loud talking and laughter. A long time the feast lasted, but at
    last all was over, and the bright wine and humming ale passed briskly.
    Then Robin Hood called aloud for silence, and all was hushed till he
    spoke.

    "I have a story to tell you all, so listen to what I have to say," quoth
    he; whereupon, without more ado, he told them all about Sir Richard, and
    how his lands were in pawn. But, as he went on, the Bishop's face, that
    had erst been smiling and ruddy with merriment, waxed serious, and he
    put aside the horn of wine he held in his hand, for he knew the story of
    Sir Richard, and his heart sank within him with grim forebodings. Then,
    when Robin Hood had done, he turned to the Bishop of Hereford. "Now, my
    Lord Bishop," said he, "dost thou not think this is ill done of anyone,
    much more of a churchman, who should live in humbleness and charity?"

    To this the Bishop answered not a word but looked upon the ground with
    moody eyes.

    Quoth Robin, "Now, thou art the richest bishop in all England; canst
    thou not help this needy brother?" But still the Bishop answered not a
    word.

    Then Robin turned to Little John, and quoth he, "Go thou and Will
    Stutely and bring forth those five pack horses yonder." Whereupon the
    two yeomen did as they were bidden, those about the cloth making room
    on the green, where the light was brightest, for the five horses which
    Little John and Will Stutely presently led forward.

    "Who hath the score of the goods?" asked Robin Hood, looking at the
    Black Friars.

    Then up spake the smallest of all, in a trembling voice - an old man he
    was, with a gentle, wrinkled face. "That have I; but, I pray thee, harm
    me not."

    "Nay," quoth Robin, "I have never harmed harmless man yet; but give it
    to me, good father." So the old man did as he was bidden, and handed
    Robin the tablet on which was marked down the account of the various
    packages upon the horses. This Robin handed to Will Scarlet, bidding
    him to read the same. So Will Scarlet, lifting his voice that all might
    hear, began:

    "Three bales of silk to Quentin, the mercer at Ancaster."

    "That we touch not," quoth Robin, "for this Quentin is an honest fellow,
    who hath risen by his own thrift." So the bales of silk were laid aside
    unopened.

    "One bale of silk velvet for the Abbey of Beaumont."

    "What do these priests want of silk velvet?" quoth Robin. "Nevertheless,
    though they need it not, I will not take all from them. Measure it off
    into three lots, one to be sold for charity, one for us, and one for the
    abbey." So this, too, was done as Robin Hood bade.

    "Twoscore of great wax candles for the Chapel of Saint Thomas."

    "That belongeth fairly to the chapel," quoth Robin, "so lay it to one
    side. Far be it from us to take from the blessed Saint Thomas that which
    belongeth to him." So this, also, was done according to Robin's bidding,
    and the candles were laid to one side, along with honest Quentin's
    unopened bales of silk. So the list was gone through with, and the goods
    adjudged according to what Robin thought most fit. Some things were
    laid aside untouched, and many were opened and divided into three equal
    parts, for charity, for themselves, and for the owners. And now all the
    ground in the torchlight was covered over with silks and velvets and
    cloths of gold and cases of rich wines, and so they came to the last
    line upon the tablet - "A box belonging to the Lord Bishop of Hereford."

    At these words the Bishop shook as with a chill, and the box was set
    upon the ground.

    "My Lord Bishop, hast thou the key of this box?" asked Robin.

    The Bishop shook his head.

    "Go, Will Scarlet," said Robin, "thou art the strongest man here - bring
    a sword straightway, and cut this box open, if thou canst." Then up rose
    Will Scarlet and left them, coming back in a short time, bearing a great
    two-handed sword. Thrice he smote that strong, ironbound box, and at the
    third blow it burst open and a great heap of gold came rolling forth,
    gleaming red in the light of the torches. At this sight a murmur went
    all around among the band, like the sound of the wind in distant trees;
    but no man came forward nor touched the money.

    Quoth Robin, "Thou, Will Scarlet, thou, Allan a Dale, and thou, Little
    John, count it over."

    A long time it took to count all the money, and when it had been duly
    scored up, Will Scarlet called out that there were fifteen hundred
    golden pounds in all. But in among the gold they found a paper, and this
    Will Scarlet read in a loud voice, and all heard that this money was
    the rental and fines and forfeits from certain estates belonging to the
    Bishopric of Hereford.

    "My Lord Bishop," said Robin Hood, "I will not strip thee, as Little
    John said, like a winter hedge, for thou shalt take back one third
    of thy money. One third of it thou canst well spare to us for thy
    entertainment and that of thy train, for thou art very rich; one third
    of it thou canst better spare for charity, for, Bishop, I hear that thou
    art a hard master to those beneath thee and a close hoarder of gains
    that thou couldst better and with more credit to thyself give to charity
    than spend upon thy own likings."

    At this the Bishop looked up, but he could say never a word; yet he was
    thankful to keep some of his wealth.

    Then Robin turned to Sir Richard of the Lea, and quoth he, "Now, Sir
    Richard, the church seemed like to despoil thee, therefore some of the
    overplus of church gains may well be used in aiding thee. Thou shalt
    take that five hundred pounds laid aside for people more in need than
    the Bishop is, and shalt pay thy debts to Emmet therewith."

    Sir Richard looked at Robin until something arose in his eyes that made
    all the lights and the faces blur together. At last he said, "I thank
    thee, friend, from my heart, for what thou doest for me; yet, think not
    ill if I cannot take thy gift freely. But this I will do: I will take
    the money and pay my debts, and in a year and a day hence will return it
    safe either to thee or to the Lord Bishop of Hereford. For this I pledge
    my most solemn knightly word. I feel free to borrow, for I know no man
    that should be more bound to aid me than one so high in that church that
    hath driven such a hard bargain." "Truly, Sir Knight," quoth Robin, "I
    do not understand those fine scruples that weigh with those of thy kind;
    but, nevertheless, it shall all be as thou dost wish. But thou hadst
    best bring the money to me at the end of the year, for mayhap I may make
    better use of it than the Bishop." Thereupon, turning to those near him,
    he gave his orders, and five hundred pounds were counted out and tied up
    in a leathern bag for Sir Richard. The rest of the treasure was divided,
    and part taken to the treasurehouse of the band, and part put by with
    the other things for the Bishop.

    Then Sir Richard arose. "I cannot stay later, good friends," said he,
    "for my lady will wax anxious if I come not home; so I crave leave to
    depart."

    Then Robin Hood and all his merry men arose, and Robin said, "We cannot
    let thee go hence unattended, Sir Richard."

    Then up spake Little John, "Good master, let me choose a score of stout
    fellows from the band, and let us arm ourselves in a seemly manner
    and so serve as retainers to Sir Richard till he can get others in our
    stead."

    "Thou hast spoken well, Little John, and it shall be done," said Robin.

    Then up spake Will Scarlet, "Let us give him a golden chain to hang
    about his neck, such as befits one of his blood, and also golden spurs
    to wear at his heels."

    Then Robin Hood said, "Thou hast spoken well, Will Scarlet, and it shall
    be done."

    Then up spake Will Stutely, "Let us give him yon bale of rich velvet
    and yon roll of cloth of gold to take home to his noble lady wife as a
    present from Robin Hood and his merry men all."

    At this all clapped their hands for joy, and Robin said: "Thou hast well
    spoken, Will Stutely, and it shall be done."

    Then Sir Richard of the Lea looked all around and strove to speak, but
    could scarcely do so for the feelings that choked him; at last he said
    in a husky, trembling voice, "Ye shall all see, good friends, that Sir
    Richard o' the Lea will ever remember your kindness this day. And if ye
    be at any time in dire need or trouble, come to me and my lady, and the
    walls of Castle Lea shall be battered down ere harm shall befall you.
    I - " He could say nothing further, but turned hastily away.

    But now Little John and nineteen stout fellows whom he had chosen for
    his band, came forth all ready for the journey. Each man wore upon his
    breast a coat of linked mail, and on his head a cap of steel, and at his
    side a good stout sword. A gallant show they made as they stood all in a
    row. Then Robin came and threw a chain of gold about Sir Richard's neck,
    and Will Scarlet knelt and buckled the golden spurs upon his heel; and
    now Little John led forward Sir Richard's horse, and the Knight mounted.
    He looked down at Robin for a little time, then of a sudden stooped and
    kissed his cheek. All the forest glades rang with the shout that went up
    as the Knight and the yeomen marched off through the woodland with glare
    of torches and gleam of steel, and so were gone.

    Then up spake the Bishop of Hereford in a mournful voice, "I, too, must
    be jogging, good fellow, for the night waxes late."

    But Robin laid his hand upon the Bishop's arm and stayed him. "Be not so
    hasty, Lord Bishop," said he. "Three days hence Sir Richard must pay his
    debts to Emmet; until that time thou must be content to abide with me
    lest thou breed trouble for the Knight. I promise thee that thou shalt
    have great sport, for I know that thou art fond of hunting the dun deer.
    Lay by thy mantle of melancholy, and strive to lead a joyous yeoman life
    for three stout days. I promise thee thou shalt be sorry to go when the
    time has come."

    So the Bishop and his train abided with Robin for three days, and much
    sport his lordship had in that time, so that, as Robin had said, when
    the time had come for him to go he was sorry to leave the greenwood. At
    the end of three days Robin set him free, and sent him forth from the
    forest with a guard of yeomen to keep freebooters from taking what was
    left of the packs and bundles.

    But, as the Bishop rode away, he vowed within himself that he would
    sometime make Robin rue the day that he stopped him in Sherwood.

    But now we shall follow Sir Richard; so listen, and you shall hear what
    befell him, and how he paid his debts at Emmet Priory, and likewise in
    due season to Robin Hood.




    How Sir Richard of the Lea Paid His Debts

    THE LONG HIGHWAY stretched straight on, gray and dusty in the sun. On
    either side were dikes full of water bordered by osiers, and far away
    in the distance stood the towers of Emmet Priory with tall poplar trees
    around.

    Along the causeway rode a knight with a score of stout men-at-arms
    behind him. The Knight was clad in a plain, long robe of gray serge,
    gathered in at the waist with a broad leathern belt, from which hung
    a long dagger and a stout sword. But though he was so plainly dressed
    himself, the horse he rode was a noble barb, and its trappings were rich
    with silk and silver bells.

    So thus the band journeyed along the causeway between the dikes, till
    at last they reached the great gate of Emmet Priory. There the Knight
    called to one of his men and bade him knock at the porter's lodge with
    the heft of his sword.

    The porter was drowsing on his bench within the lodge, but at the knock
    he roused himself and, opening the wicket, came hobbling forth and
    greeted the Knight, while a tame starling that hung in a wicker cage
    within piped out, "_In coelo quies! In coelo quies!_" such being the
    words that the poor old lame porter had taught him to speak.

    "Where is thy prior?" asked the Knight of the old porter.

    "He is at meat, good knight, and he looketh for thy coming," quoth the
    porter, "for, if I mistake not, thou art Sir Richard of the Lea."

    "I am Sir Richard of the Lea; then I will go seek him forthwith," said
    the Knight.

    "But shall I not send thy horse to stable?" said the porter. "By Our
    Lady, it is the noblest nag, and the best harnessed, that e'er I saw in
    all my life before." And he stroked the horse's flank with his palm.

    "Nay," quoth Sir Richard, "the stables of this place are not for me, so
    make way, I prythee." So saying, he pushed forward, and, the gates being
    opened, he entered the stony courtyard of the Priory, his men behind
    him. In they came with rattle of steel and clashing of swords, and
    ring of horses' feet on cobblestones, whereat a flock of pigeons that
    strutted in the sun flew with flapping wings to the high eaves of the
    round towers.


    While the Knight was riding along the causeway to Emmet, a merry feast
    was toward in the refectory there. The afternoon sun streamed in through
    the great arched windows and lay in broad squares of light upon the
    stone floor and across the board covered with a snowy linen cloth,
    whereon was spread a princely feast. At the head of the table sat Prior
    Vincent of Emmet all clad in soft robes of fine cloth and silk; on his
    head was a black velvet cap picked out with gold, and around his neck
    hung a heavy chain of gold, with a great locket pendant therefrom.
    Beside him, on the arm of his great chair, roosted his favorite falcon,
    for the Prior was fond of the gentle craft of hawking. On his right hand
    sat the Sheriff of Nottingham in rich robes of purple all trimmed about
    with fur, and on his left a famous doctor of law in dark and sober garb.
    Below these sat the high cellarer of Emmet, and others chief among the
    brethren.

    Jest and laughter passed around, and all was as merry as merry could be.
    The wizened face of the man of law was twisted into a wrinkled smile,
    for in his pouch were fourscore golden angels that the Prior had paid
    him in fee for the case betwixt him and Sir Richard of the Lea. The
    learned doctor had been paid beforehand, for he had not overmuch trust
    in the holy Vincent of Emmet.

    Quoth the Sheriff of Nottingham, "But art thou sure, Sir Prior, that
    thou hast the lands so safe?"

    "Ay, marry," said Prior Vincent, smacking his lips after a deep draught
    of wine, "I have kept a close watch upon him, albeit he was unawares of
    the same, and I know right well that he hath no money to pay me withal."

    "Ay, true," said the man of law in a dry, husky voice, "his land is
    surely forfeit if he cometh not to pay; but, Sir Prior, thou must get a
    release beneath his sign manual, or else thou canst not hope to hold the
    land without trouble from him."

    "Yea," said the Prior, "so thou hast told me ere now, but I know that
    this knight is so poor that he will gladly sign away his lands for two
    hundred pounds of hard money."

    Then up spake the high cellarer, "Methinks it is a shame to so drive
    a misfortunate knight to the ditch. I think it sorrow that the noblest
    estate in Derbyshire should so pass away from him for a paltry five
    hundred pounds. Truly, I - "

    "How now," broke in the Prior in a quivering voice, his eyes glistening
    and his cheeks red with anger, "dost thou prate to my very beard,
    sirrah? By Saint Hubert, thou hadst best save thy breath to cool thy
    pottage, else it may scald thy mouth."

    "Nay," said the man of law smoothly, "I dare swear this same knight
    will never come to settlement this day, but will prove recreant.
    Nevertheless, we will seek some means to gain his lands from him, so
    never fear."

    But even as the doctor spoke, there came a sudden clatter of horses'
    hoofs and a jingle of iron mail in the courtyard below. Then up spake
    the Prior and called upon one of the brethren that sat below the salt,
    and bade him look out of the window and see who was below, albeit he
    knew right well it could be none but Sir Richard.

    So the brother arose and went and looked, and he said, "I see below a
    score of stout men-at-arms and a knight just dismounting from his
    horse. He is dressed in long robes of gray which, methinks, are of poor
    seeming; but the horse he rideth upon hath the richest coursing that
    ever I saw. The Knight dismounts and they come this way, and are even
    now below in the great hall."

    "Lo, see ye there now," quoth Prior Vincent. "Here ye have a knight with
    so lean a purse as scarce to buy him a crust of bread to munch, yet he
    keeps a band of retainers and puts rich trappings upon his horse's hide,
    while his own back goeth bare. Is it not well that such men should be
    brought low?"

    "But art thou sure," said the little doctor tremulously, "that this
    knight will do us no harm? Such as he are fierce when crossed, and he
    hath a band of naughty men at his heels. Mayhap thou hadst better give
    an extension of his debt." Thus he spake, for he was afraid Sir Richard
    might do him a harm.

    "Thou needst not fear," said the Prior, looking down at the little man
    beside him. "This knight is gentle and would as soon think of harming an
    old woman as thee."

    As the Prior finished, a door at the lower end of the refectory swung
    open, and in came Sir Richard, with folded hands and head bowed upon his
    breast. Thus humbly he walked slowly up the hall, while his men-at-arms
    stood about the door. When he had come to where the Prior sat, he knelt
    upon one knee. "Save and keep thee, Sir Prior," said he, "I am come to
    keep my day."

    Then the first word that the Prior said to him was "Hast thou brought my
    money?"

    "Alas! I have not so much as one penny upon my body," said the Knight;
    whereat the Prior's eyes sparkled.

    "Now, thou art a shrewd debtor, I wot," said he. Then, "Sir Sheriff, I
    drink to thee."

    But still the Knight kneeled upon the hard stones, so the Prior turned
    to him again. "What wouldst thou have?" quoth he sharply.

    At these words, a slow red mounted into the Knight's cheeks; but still
    he knelt. "I would crave thy mercy," said he. "As thou hopest for
    Heaven's mercy, show mercy to me. Strip me not of my lands and so reduce
    a true knight to poverty."

    "Thy day is broken and thy lands forfeit," said the man of law, plucking
    up his spirits at the Knight's humble speech.

    Quoth Sir Richard, "Thou man of law, wilt thou not befriend me in mine
    hour of need?"

    "Nay," said the other, "I hold with this holy Prior, who hath paid me my
    fees in hard gold, so that I am bounder to him."

    "Wilt thou not be my friend, Sir Sheriff?" said Sir Richard.

    "Nay, 'fore Heaven," quoth the Sheriff of Nottingham, "this is no
    business of mine, yet I will do what I may," and he nudged the Prior
    beneath the cloth with his knee. "Wilt thou not ease him of some of his
    debts, Sir Prior?"

    At this the Prior smiled grimly. "Pay me three hundred pounds, Sir
    Richard," said he, "and I will give thee quittance of thy debt."

    "Thou knowest, Sir Prior, that it is as easy for me to pay four hundred
    pounds as three hundred," said Sir Richard. "But wilt thou not give me
    another twelvemonth to pay my debt?"

    "Not another day," said the Prior sternly.

    "And is this all thou wilt do for me?" asked the Knight.

    "Now, out upon thee, false knight!" cried the Prior, bursting forth in
    anger. "Either pay thy debt as I have said, or release thy land and get
    thee gone from out my hall."

    Then Sir Richard arose to his feet. "Thou false, lying priest!" said
    he in so stern a voice that the man of law shrunk affrighted, "I am no
    false knight, as thou knowest full well, but have even held my place
    in the press and the tourney. Hast thou so little courtesy that thou
    wouldst see a true knight kneel for all this time, or see him come into
    thy hall and never offer him meat or drink?"

    Then quoth the man of law in a trembling voice, "This is surely an
    ill way to talk of matters appertaining to business; let us be mild in
    speech. What wilt thou pay this knight, Sir Prior, to give thee release
    of his land?"

    "I would have given him two hundred pounds," quoth the Prior, "but since
    he hath spoken so vilely to my teeth, not one groat over one hundred
    pounds will he get."

    "Hadst thou offered me a thousand pounds, false prior," said the Knight,
    "thou wouldst not have got an inch of my land." Then turning to where
    his men-at-arms stood near the door, he called, "Come hither," and
    beckoned with his finger; whereupon the tallest of them all came forward
    and handed him a long leathern bag. Sir Richard took the bag and shot
    from it upon the table a glittering stream of golden money. "Bear in
    mind, Sir Prior," said he, "that thou hast promised me quittance for
    three hundred pounds. Not one farthing above that shalt thou get." So
    saying, he counted out three hundred pounds and pushed it toward the
    Prior.

    But now the Prior's hands dropped at his sides and the Prior's head hung
    upon his shoulder, for not only had he lost all hopes of the land,
    but he had forgiven the Knight one hundred pounds of his debt and had
    needlessly paid the man of law fourscore angels. To him he turned, and
    quoth he, "Give me back my money that thou hast."

    "Nay," cried the other shrilly, "it is but my fee that thou didst pay
    me, and thou gettest it not back again." And he hugged his gown about
    him.

    "Now, Sir Prior," quoth Sir Richard, "I have held my day and paid all
    the dues demanded of me; so, as there is no more betwixt us, I leave
    this vile place straightway." So saying, he turned upon his heel and
    strode away.

    All this time the Sheriff had been staring with wide-open eyes and mouth
    agape at the tall man-at-arms, who stood as though carved out of stone.
    At last he gasped out, "Reynold Greenleaf!"

    At this, the tall man-at-arms, who was no other than Little John,
    turned, grinning, to the Sheriff. "I give thee good den, fair gossip,"
    quoth he. "I would say, sweet Sheriff, that I have heard all thy pretty
    talk this day, and it shall be duly told unto Robin Hood. So, farewell
    for the nonce, till we meet again in Sherwood Forest." Then he, also,
    turned and followed Sir Richard down the hall, leaving the Sheriff, all
    pale and amazed, shrunk together upon his chair.

    A merry feast it was to which Sir Richard came, but a sorry lot he left
    behind him, and little hunger had they for the princely food spread
    before them. Only the learned doctor was happy, for he had his fee.


    Now a twelvemonth and a day passed since Prior Vincent of Emmet sat at
    feast, and once more the mellow fall of another year had come. But the
    year had brought great change, I wot, to the lands of Sir Richard of the
    Lea; for, where before shaggy wild grasses grew upon the meadow lands,
    now all stretch away in golden stubble, betokening that a rich and
    plentiful crop had been gathered therefrom. A year had made a great
    change in the castle, also, for, where were empty moats and the
    crumbling of neglect, all was now orderly and well kept.

    Bright shone the sun on battlement and tower, and in the blue air
    overhead a Hock of clattering jackdaws flew around the gilded weather
    vane and spire. Then, in the brightness of the morning, the drawbridge
    fell across the moat with a rattle and clank of chains, the gate of the
    castle swung slowly open, and a goodly array of steel-clad men-at-arms,
    with a knight all clothed in chain mail, as white as frost on brier and
    thorn of a winter morning, came flashing out from the castle courtyard.
    In his hand the Knight held a great spear, from the point of which
    fluttered a blood-red pennant as broad as the palm of one's hand. So
    this troop came forth from the castle, and in the midst of them walked
    three pack horses laden with parcels of divers shapes and kinds.

    Thus rode forth good Sir Richard of the Lea to pay his debt to Robin
    Hood this bright and merry morn. Along the highway they wended their
    way, with measured tramp of feet and rattle and jingle of sword and
    harness. Onward they marched till they came nigh to Denby, where, from
    the top of a hill, they saw, over beyond the town, many gay flags and
    streamers floating in the bright air. Then Sir Richard turned to the
    man-at-arms nearest to him. "What is toward yonder at Denby today?"
    quoth he.

    "Please Your Worship," answered the man-at-arms, "a merry fair is held
    there today, and a great wrestling match, to which many folk have come,
    for a prize hath been offered of a pipe of red wine, a fair golden ring,
    and a pair of gloves, all of which go to the best wrestler."

    "Now, by my faith," quoth Sir Richard, who loved good manly sports right
    well, "this will be a goodly thing to see. Methinks we have to stay a
    little while on our journey, and see this merry sport." So he turned his
    horse's head aside toward Denby and the fair, and thither he and his men
    made their way.

    There they found a great hubbub of merriment. Flags and streamers were
    floating, tumblers were tumbling on the green, bagpipes were playing,
    and lads and lasses were dancing to the music. But the crowd were
    gathered most of all around a ring where the wrestling was going
    forward, and thither Sir Richard and his men turned their steps.

    Now when the judges of the wrestling saw Sir Richard coming and knew
    who he was, the chief of them came down from the bench where he and the
    others sat, and went to the Knight and took him by the hand, beseeching
    him to come and sit with them and judge the sport. So Sir Richard got
    down from his horse and went with the others to the bench raised beside
    the ring.

    Now there had been great doings that morning, for a certain yeoman named
    Egbert, who came from Stoke over in Staffordshire, had thrown with ease
    all those that came against him; but a man of Denby, well known through
    all the countryside as William of the Scar, had been biding his time
    with the Stoke man; so, when Egbert had thrown everyone else, stout
    William leaped into the ring. Then a tough bout followed, and at last he
    threw Egbert heavily, whereat there was a great shouting and shaking of
    hands, for all the Denby men were proud of their wrestler.

    When Sir Richard came, he found stout William, puffed up by the shouts
    of his friends, walking up and down the ring, daring anyone to come and
    try a throw with him. "Come one, come all!" quoth he. "Here stand I,
    William of the Scar, against any man. If there is none in Derbyshire to
    come against me, come all who will, from Nottingham, Stafford, or York,
    and if I do not make them one and all root the ground with their noses
    like swine in the forests, call me no more brave William the wrestler."

    At this all laughed; but above all the laughter a loud voice was
    heard to cry out, "Sin' thou talkest so big, here cometh one from
    Nottinghamshire to try a fall with thee, fellow;" and straightway a tall
    youth with a tough quarterstaff in his hand came pushing his way through
    the crowd and at last leaped lightly over the rope into the ring. He
    was not as heavy as stout William, but he was taller and broader in the
    shoulders, and all his joints were well knit. Sir Richard looked upon
    him keenly, then, turning to one of the judges, he said, "Knowest thou
    who this youth is? Methinks I have seen him before."

    "Nay," said the judge, "he is a stranger to me."

    Meantime, without a word, the young man, laying aside his quarterstaff,
    began to take off his jerkin and body clothing until he presently stood
    with naked arms and body; and a comely sight he was when so bared to
    the view, for his muscles were cut round and smooth and sharp like
    swift-running water.

    And now each man spat upon his hands and, clapping them upon his knees,
    squatted down, watching the other keenly, so as to take the vantage of
    him in the grip. Then like a flash they leaped together, and a great
    shout went up, for William had gotten the better hold of the two. For
    a short time they strained and struggled and writhed, and then stout
    William gave his most cunning trip and throw, but the stranger met it
    with greater skill than his, and so the trip came to nought. Then, of a
    sudden, with a twist and a wrench, the stranger loosed himself, and he
    of the scar found himself locked in a pair of arms that fairly made
    his ribs crack. So, with heavy, hot breathing, they stood for a while
    straining, their bodies all glistening with sweat, and great drops of
    sweat trickling down their faces. But the stranger's hug was so close
    that at last stout William's muscles softened under his grip, and he
    gave a sob. Then the youth put forth all his strength and gave a sudden
    trip with his heel and a cast over his right hip, and down stout William
    went, with a sickening thud, and lay as though he would never move hand
    nor foot again.

    But now no shout went up for the stranger, but an angry murmur was heard
    among the crowd, so easily had he won the match. Then one of the judges,
    a kinsman to William of the Scar, rose with trembling lip and baleful
    look. Quoth he, "If thou hath slain that man it will go ill with thee,
    let me tell thee, fellow." But the stranger answered boldly, "He took
    his chance with me as I took mine with him. No law can touch me to harm
    me, even if I slew him, so that it was fairly done in the wrestling
    ring."

    "That we shall see," said the judge, scowling upon the youth, while once
    more an angry murmur ran around the crowd; for, as I have said, the men
    of Denby were proud of stout William of the Scar.

    Then up spoke Sir Richard gently. "Nay," said he, "the youth is right;
    if the other dieth, he dieth in the wrestling ring, where he took his
    chance, and was cast fairly enow."

    But in the meantime three men had come forward and lifted stout William
    from the ground and found that he was not dead, though badly shaken
    by his heavy fall. Then the chief judge rose and said, "Young man, the
    prize is duly thine. Here is the red-gold ring, and here the gloves, and
    yonder stands the pipe of wine to do with whatsoever thou dost list."

    At this, the youth, who had donned his clothes and taken up his staff
    again, bowed without a word, then, taking the gloves and the ring, and
    thrusting the one into his girdle and slipping the other upon his
    thumb, he turned and, leaping lightly over the ropes again, made his way
    through the crowd, and was gone.

    "Now, I wonder who yon youth may be," said the judge, turning to Sir
    Richard, "he seemeth like a stout Saxon from his red cheeks and fair
    hair. This William of ours is a stout man, too, and never have I seen
    him cast in the ring before, albeit he hath not yet striven with such
    great wrestlers as Thomas of Cornwall, Diccon of York, and young David
    of Doncaster. Hath he not a firm foot in the ring, thinkest thou, Sir
    Richard?"

    "Ay, truly, and yet this youth threw him fairly, and with wondrous ease.
    I much wonder who he can be." Thus said Sir Richard in a thoughtful
    voice.

    For a time the Knight stood talking to those about him, but at last
    he arose and made ready to depart, so he called his men about him and,
    tightening the girths of his saddle, he mounted his horse once more.

    Meanwhile the young stranger had made his way through the crowd, but, as
    he passed, he heard all around him such words muttered as "Look at the
    cockerel!" "Behold how he plumeth himself!" "I dare swear he cast good
    William unfairly!" "Yea, truly, saw ye not birdlime upon his hands?" "It
    would be well to cut his cock's comb!" To all this the stranger paid no
    heed, but strode proudly about as though he heard it not. So he walked
    slowly across the green to where the booth stood wherein was dancing,
    and standing at the door he looked in on the sport. As he stood thus, a
    stone struck his arm of a sudden with a sharp jar, and, turning, he saw
    that an angry crowd of men had followed him from the wrestling ring.
    Then, when they saw him turn so, a great hooting and yelling arose from
    all, so that the folk came running out from the dancing booth to see
    what was to do. At last a tall, broad-shouldered, burly blacksmith
    strode forward from the crowd swinging a mighty blackthorn club in his
    hand.

    "Wouldst thou come here to our fair town of Denby, thou Jack in the Box,
    to overcome a good honest lad with vile, juggling tricks?" growled he in
    a deep voice like the bellow of an angry bull. "Take that, then!" And of
    a sudden he struck a blow at the youth that might have felled an ox.
    But the other turned the blow deftly aside, and gave back another so
    terrible that the Denby man went down with a groan, as though he had
    been smitten by lightning. When they saw their leader fall, the crowd
    gave another angry shout; but the stranger placed his back against the
    tent near which he stood, swinging his terrible staff, and so fell had
    been the blow that he struck the stout smith that none dared to come
    within the measure of his cudgel, so the press crowded back, like a pack
    of dogs from a bear at bay. But now some coward hand from behind threw
    a sharp jagged stone that smote the stranger on the crown, so that he
    staggered back, and the red blood gushed from the cut and ran down his
    face and over his jerkin. Then, seeing him dazed with this vile blow,
    the crowd rushed upon him, so that they overbore him and he fell beneath
    their feet.

    Now it might have gone ill with the youth, even to the losing of his
    young life, had not Sir Richard come to this fair; for of a sudden,
    shouts were heard, and steel flashed in the air, and blows were given
    with the flat of swords, while through the midst of the crowd Sir
    Richard of the Lea came spurring on his white horse. Then the crowd,
    seeing the steel-clad knight and the armed men, melted away like snow
    on the warm hearth, leaving the young man all bloody and dusty upon the
    ground.

    Finding himself free, the youth arose and, wiping the blood from his
    face, looked up. Quoth he, "Sir Richard of the Lea, mayhap thou hast
    saved my life this day."

    "Who art thou that knowest Sir Richard of the Lea so well?" quoth the
    Knight. "Methinks I have seen thy face before, young man."

    "Yea, thou hast," said the youth, "for men call me David of Doncaster."

    "Ha!" said Sir Richard, "I wonder that I knew thee not, David; but thy
    beard hath grown longer, and thou thyself art more set in manhood since
    this day twelvemonth. Come hither into the tent, David, and wash the
    blood from thy face. And thou, Ralph, bring him straightway a clean
    jerkin. Now I am sorry for thee, yet I am right glad that I have had
    a chance to pay a part of my debt of kindness to thy good master Robin
    Hood, for it might have gone ill with thee had I not come, young man."

    So saying, the Knight led David into the tent, and there the youth
    washed the blood from his face and put on the clean jerkin.

    In the meantime a whisper had gone around from those that stood nearest
    that this was none other than the great David of Doncaster, the best
    wrestler in all the mid-country, who only last spring had cast stout
    Adam o' Lincoln in the ring at Selby, in Yorkshire, and now held the
    mid-country champion belt, Thus it happened that when young David came
    forth from the tent along with Sir Richard, the blood all washed from
    his face, and his soiled jerkin changed for a clean one, no sounds of
    anger were heard, but all pressed forward to see the young man, feeling
    proud that one of the great wrestlers of England should have entered the
    ring at Denby fair. For thus fickle is a mass of men.

    Then Sir Richard called aloud, "Friends, this is David of Doncaster; so
    think it no shame that your Denby man was cast by such a wrestler. He
    beareth you no ill will for what hath passed, but let it be a warning
    to you how ye treat strangers henceforth. Had ye slain him it would have
    been an ill day for you, for Robin Hood would have harried your town as
    the kestrel harries the dovecote. I have bought the pipe of wine from
    him, and now I give it freely to you to drink as ye list. But never
    hereafterward fall upon a man for being a stout yeoman."

    At this all shouted amain; but in truth they thought more of the wine
    than of the Knight's words. Then Sir Richard, with David beside him and
    his men-at-arms around, turned about and left the fair.

    But in after days, when the men that saw that wrestling bout were bent
    with age, they would shake their heads when they heard of any stalwart
    game, and say, "Ay, ay; but thou shouldst have seen the great David of
    Doncaster cast stout William of the Scar at Denby fair."

    Robin Hood stood in the merry greenwood with Little John and most of his
    stout yeomen around him, awaiting Sir Richard's coming. At last a glint
    of steel was seen through the brown forest leaves, and forth from the
    covert into the open rode Sir Richard at the head of his men. He came
    straight forward to Robin Hood and leaping from off his horse, clasped
    the yeoman in his arms.

    "Why, how now," said Robin, after a time, holding Sir Richard off and
    looking at him from top to toe, "methinks thou art a gayer bird than
    when I saw thee last."

    "Yes, thanks to thee, Robin," said the Knight, laying his hand upon the
    yeoman's shoulder. "But for thee I would have been wandering in misery
    in a far country by this time. But I have kept my word, Robin, and have
    brought back the money that thou didst lend me, and which I have doubled
    four times over again, and so become rich once more. Along with this
    money I have brought a little gift to thee and thy brave men from my
    dear lady and myself." Then, turning to his men, he called aloud, "Bring
    forth the pack horses."

    But Robin stopped him. "Nay, Sir Richard," said he, "think it not bold
    of me to cross thy bidding, but we of Sherwood do no business till after
    we have eaten and drunk." Whereupon, taking Sir Richard by the hand,
    he led him to the seat beneath the greenwood tree, while others of the
    chief men of the band came and seated themselves around. Then quoth
    Robin, "How cometh it that I saw young David of Doncaster with thee and
    thy men, Sir Knight?"

    Then straightway the Knight told all about his stay at Denby and of the
    happening at the fair, and how it was like to go hard with young David;
    so he told his tale, and quoth he, "It was this, good Robin, that kept
    me so late on the way, otherwise I would have been here an hour agone."

    Then, when he had done speaking, Robin stretched out his hand and
    grasped the Knight's palm. Quoth he in a trembling voice, "I owe thee
    a debt I can never hope to repay, Sir Richard, for let me tell thee, I
    would rather lose my right hand than have such ill befall young David of
    Doncaster as seemed like to come upon him at Denby."

    So they talked until after a while one came forward to say that the
    feast was spread; whereupon all arose and went thereto. When at last
    it was done, the Knight called upon his men to bring the pack horses
    forward, which they did according to his bidding. Then one of the men
    brought the Knight a strongbox, which he opened and took from it a bag
    and counted out five hundred pounds, the sum he had gotten from Robin.

    "Sir Richard," quoth Robin, "thou wilt pleasure us all if thou wilt keep
    that money as a gift from us of Sherwood. Is it not so, my lads?"

    Then all shouted "Ay" with a mighty voice.

    "I thank you all deeply," said the Knight earnestly, "but think it not
    ill of me if I cannot take it. Gladly have I borrowed it from you, but
    it may not be that I can take it as a gift."

    Then Robin Hood said no more but gave the money to Little John to put
    away in the treasury, for he had shrewdness enough to know that nought
    breeds ill will and heart bitterness like gifts forced upon one that
    cannot choose but take them.

    Then Sir Richard had the packs laid upon the ground and opened,
    whereupon a great shout went up that made the forest ring again, for lo,
    there were tenscore bows of finest Spanish yew, all burnished till they
    shone again, and each bow inlaid with fanciful figures in silver, yet
    not inlaid so as to mar their strength. Beside these were tenscore
    quivers of leather embroidered with golden thread, and in each quiver
    were a score of shafts with burnished heads that shone like silver; each
    shaft was feathered with peacock's plumes, innocked with silver.

    Sir Richard gave to each yeoman a bow and a quiver of arrows, but to
    Robin he gave a stout bow inlaid with the cunningest workmanship in
    gold, while each arrow in his quiver was innocked with gold.

    Then all shouted again for joy of the fair gift, and all swore among
    themselves that they would die if need be for Sir Richard and his lady.

    At last the time came when Sir Richard must go, whereupon Robin Hood
    called his band around him, and each man of the yeomen took a torch in
    his hand to light the way through the woodlands. So they came to the
    edge of Sherwood, and there the Knight kissed Robin upon the cheeks and
    left him and was gone.

    Thus Robin Hood helped a noble knight out of his dire misfortunes, that
    else would have smothered the happiness from his life.




    Little John Turns Barefoot Friar

    COLD WINTER had passed and spring had come. No leafy thickness had yet
    clad the woodlands, but the budding leaves hung like a tender mist about
    the trees. In the open country the meadow lands lay a sheeny green, the
    cornfields a dark velvety color, for they were thick and soft with
    the growing blades. The plowboy shouted in the sun, and in the purple
    new-turned furrows flocks of birds hunted for fat worms. All the broad
    moist earth smiled in the warm light, and each little green hill clapped
    its hand for joy.

    On a deer's hide, stretched on the ground in the open in front of the
    greenwood tree, sat Robin Hood basking in the sun like an old dog fox.
    Leaning back with his hands clasped about his knees, he lazily watched
    Little John rolling a stout bowstring from long strands of hempen
    thread, wetting the palms of his hands ever and anon, and rolling the
    cord upon his thigh. Near by sat Allan a Dale fitting a new string to
    his harp.

    Quoth Robin at last, "Methinks I would rather roam this forest in the
    gentle springtime than be King of all merry England. What palace in the
    broad world is as fair as this sweet woodland just now, and what king in
    all the world hath such appetite for plover's eggs and lampreys as I for
    juicy venison and sparkling ale? Gaffer Swanthold speaks truly when he
    saith, 'Better a crust with content than honey with a sour heart.'"

    "Yea," quoth Little John, as he rubbed his new-made bowstring with
    yellow beeswax, "the life we lead is the life for me. Thou speakest of
    the springtime, but methinks even the winter hath its own joys. Thou and
    I, good master, have had more than one merry day, this winter past, at
    the Blue Boar. Dost thou not remember that night thou and Will Stutely
    and Friar Tuck and I passed at that same hostelry with the two beggars
    and the strolling friar?"

    "Yea," quoth merry Robin, laughing, "that was the night that Will
    Stutely must needs snatch a kiss from the stout hostess, and got a
    canakin of ale emptied over his head for his pains."

    "Truly, it was the same," said Little John, laughing also. "Methinks
    that was a goodly song that the strolling friar sang. Friar Tuck, thou
    hast a quick ear for a tune, dost thou not remember it?"

    "I did have the catch of it one time," said Tuck. "Let me see," and he
    touched his forefinger to his forehead in thought, humming to himself,
    and stopping ever and anon to fit what he had got to what he searched
    for in his mind. At last he found it all and clearing his throat, sang
    merrily:

         "_In the blossoming hedge the robin cock sings,
         For the sun it is merry and bright,
         And he joyfully hops and he flutters his wings,
         For his heart is all full of delight.
         For the May bloometh fair,
         And there's little of care,
         And plenty to eat in the Maytime rare.
         When the flowers all die,
         Then off he will fly,
         To keep himself warm
         In some jolly old barn
         Where the snow and the wind neither chill him nor harm.

         "And such is the life of the strolling friar,
         With aplenty to eat and to drink;
         For the goodwife will keep him a seat by the fire,
         And the pretty girls smile at his wink.
         Then he lustily trolls
         As he onward strolls,
         A rollicking song for the saving of souls.
         When the wind doth blow,
         With the coming of snow,
         There's a place by the fire
         For the fatherly friar,
         And a crab in the bowl for his heart's desire_."

    Thus Friar Tuck sang in a rich and mellow voice, rolling his head from
    side to side in time with the music, and when he had done, all clapped
    their hands and shouted with laughter, for the song fitted him well.

    "In very sooth," quoth Little John, "it is a goodly song, and, were I
    not a yeoman of Sherwood Forest, I had rather be a strolling friar than
    aught else in the world."

    "Yea, it is a goodly song," said Robin Hood, "but methought those two
    burly beggars told the merrier tales and led the merrier life. Dost thou
    not remember what that great black-bearded fellow told of his begging at
    the fair in York?"

    "Yea," said Little John, "but what told the friar of the harvest home in
    Kentshire? I hold that he led a merrier life than the other two."

    "Truly, for the honor of the cloth," quoth Friar Tuck, "I hold with my
    good gossip, Little John."

    "Now," quoth Robin, "I hold to mine own mind. But what sayst thou,
    Little John, to a merry adventure this fair day? Take thou a friar's
    gown from our chest of strange garments, and don the same, and I will
    stop the first beggar I meet and change clothes with him. Then let us
    wander the country about, this sweet day, and see what befalls each of
    us."

    "That fitteth my mind," quoth Little John, "so let us forth, say I."

    Thereupon Little John and Friar Tuck went to the storehouse of the band,
    and there chose for the yeoman the robe of a Gray Friar. Then they came
    forth again, and a mighty roar of laughter went up, for not only had the
    band never seen Little John in such guise before, but the robe was too
    short for him by a good palm's-breadth. But Little John's hands were
    folded in his loose sleeves, and Little John's eyes were cast upon the
    ground, and at his girdle hung a great, long string of beads.

    And now Little John took up his stout staff, at the end of which hung
    a chubby little leathern pottle, such as palmers carry at the tips of
    their staves; but in it was something, I wot, more like good Malmsey
    than cold spring water, such as godly pilgrims carry. Then up rose Robin
    and took his stout staff in his hand, likewise, and slipped ten golden
    angels into his pouch; for no beggar's garb was among the stores of the
    band, so he was fain to run his chance of meeting a beggar and buying
    his clothes of him.

    So, all being made ready, the two yeomen set forth on their way,
    striding lustily along all in the misty morning. Thus they walked down
    the forest path until they came to the highway, and then along the
    highway till it split in twain, leading on one hand to Blyth and on the
    other to Gainsborough. Here the yeomen stopped.

    Quoth jolly Robin, "Take thou the road to Gainsborough, and I will take
    that to Blyth. So, fare thee well, holy father, and mayst thou not ha'
    cause to count thy beads in earnest ere we meet again."

    "Good den, good beggar that is to be," quoth Little John, "and mayst
    thou have no cause to beg for mercy ere I see thee next."

    So each stepped sturdily upon his way until a green hill rose between
    them, and the one was hid from the sight of the other.

    Little John walked along, whistling, for no one was nigh upon all the
    road. In the budding hedges the little birds twittered merrily, and on
    either hand the green hills swept up to the sky, the great white clouds
    of springtime sailing slowly over their crowns in lazy flight. Up hill
    and down dale walked Little John, the fresh wind blowing in his face and
    his robes fluttering behind him, and so at last he came to a crossroad
    that led to Tuxford. Here he met three pretty lasses, each bearing a
    basket of eggs to market. Quoth he, "Whither away, fair maids?" And he
    stood in their path, holding his staff in front of them, to stop them.

    Then they huddled together and nudged one another, and one presently
    spake up and said, "We are going to the Tuxford market, holy friar, to
    sell our eggs."

    "Now out upon it!" quoth Little John, looking upon them with his head on
    one side. "Surely, it is a pity that such fair lasses should be forced
    to carry eggs to market. Let me tell you, an I had the shaping of things
    in this world, ye should all three have been clothed in the finest
    silks, and ride upon milk-white horses, with pages at your side, and
    feed upon nothing but whipped cream and strawberries; for such a life
    would surely befit your looks."

    At this speech all three of the pretty maids looked down, blushing and
    simpering. One said, "La!" another, "Marry, a' maketh sport of us!" and
    the third, "Listen, now, to the holy man!" But at the same time they
    looked at Little John from out the corners of their eyes.

    "Now, look you," said Little John, "I cannot see such dainty damsels
    as ye are carrying baskets along a highroad. Let me take them mine own
    self, and one of you, if ye will, may carry my staff for me."

    "Nay," said one of the lasses, "but thou canst not carry three baskets
    all at one time."

    "Yea, but I can," said Little John, "and that I will show you presently.
    I thank the good Saint Wilfred that he hath given me a pretty wit. Look
    ye, now. Here I take this great basket, so; here I tie my rosary around
    the handle, thus; and here I slip the rosary over my head and sling the
    basket upon my back, in this wise." And Little John did according to his
    words, the basket hanging down behind him like a peddler's pack; then,
    giving his staff to one of the maids, and taking a basket upon either
    arm, he turned his face toward Tuxford Town and stepped forth merrily, a
    laughing maid on either side, and one walking ahead, carrying the staff.
    In this wise they journeyed along, and everyone they met stopped and
    looked after them, laughing, for never had anybody seen such a merry
    sight as this tall, strapping Gray Friar, with robes all too short for
    him, laden with eggs, and tramping the road with three pretty lasses.
    For this Little John cared not a whit, but when such folks gave jesting
    words to him he answered back as merrily, speech for speech.

    So they stepped along toward Tuxford, chatting and laughing, until
    they came nigh to the town. Here Little John stopped and set down
    the baskets, for he did not care to go into the town lest he should,
    perchance, meet some of the Sheriff's men. "Alas! sweet chucks," quoth
    he, "here I must leave you. I had not thought to come this way, but I am
    glad that I did so. Now, ere we part, we must drink sweet friendship."
    So saying, he unslung the leathern pottle from the end of his staff,
    and, drawing the stopper therefrom, he handed it to the lass who had
    carried his staff, first wiping the mouth of the pottle upon his sleeve.
    Then each lass took a fair drink of what was within, and when it had
    passed all around, Little John finished what was left, so that not
    another drop could be squeezed from it. Then, kissing each lass sweetly,
    he wished them all good den, and left them. But the maids stood looking
    after him as he walked away whistling. "What a pity," quoth one, "that
    such a stout, lusty lad should be in holy orders."

    "Marry," quoth Little John to himself, as he strode along, "yon was no
    such ill happening; Saint Dunstan send me more of the like."

    After he had trudged along for a time he began to wax thirsty again in
    the warmth of the day. He shook his leathern pottle beside his ear, but
    not a sound came therefrom. Then he placed it to his lips and tilted it
    high aloft, but not a drop was there. "Little John! Little John!" said
    he sadly to himself, shaking his head the while, "woman will be thy ruin
    yet, if thou dost not take better care of thyself."

    But at last he reached the crest of a certain hill, and saw below a
    sweet little thatched inn lying snugly in the dale beneath him, toward
    which the road dipped sharply. At the sight of this, a voice within him
    cried aloud, "I give thee joy, good friend, for yonder is thy heart's
    delight, to wit, a sweet rest and a cup of brown beer." So he quickened
    his pace down the hill and so came to the little inn, from which hung a
    sign with a stag's head painted upon it. In front of the door a clucking
    hen was scratching in the dust with a brood of chickens about her heels,
    the sparrows were chattering of household affairs under the eaves, and
    all was so sweet and peaceful that Little John's heart laughed within
    him. Beside the door stood two stout cobs with broad soft-padded
    saddles, well fitted for easy traveling, and speaking of rich guests
    in the parlor. In front of the door three merry fellows, a tinker, a
    peddler, and a beggar, were seated on a bench in the sun quaffing stout
    ale.

    "I give you good den, sweet friends," quoth Little John, striding up to
    where they sat.

    "Give thee good den, holy father," quoth the merry Beggar with a grin.
    "But look thee, thy gown is too short. Thou hadst best cut a piece off
    the top and tack it to the bottom, so that it may be long enough. But
    come, sit beside us here and take a taste of ale, if thy vows forbid
    thee not."

    "Nay," quoth Little John, also grinning, "the blessed Saint Dunstan hath
    given me a free dispensation for all indulgence in that line." And he
    thrust his hand into his pouch for money to pay his score.

    "Truly," quoth the Tinker, "without thy looks belie thee, holy friar,
    the good Saint Dunstan was wise, for without such dispensation his
    votary is like to ha' many a penance to make. Nay, take thy hand from
    out thy pouch, brother, for thou shalt not pay this shot. Ho, landlord,
    a pot of ale!"

    So the ale was brought and given to Little John. Then, blowing the froth
    a little way to make room for his lips, he tilted the bottom of the pot
    higher and higher, till it pointed to the sky, and he had to shut his
    eyes to keep the dazzle of the sunshine out of them. Then he took the
    pot away, for there was nothing in it, and heaved a full deep sigh,
    looking at the others with moist eyes and shaking his head solemnly.

    "Ho, landlord!" cried the Peddler, "bring this good fellow another pot
    of ale, for truly it is a credit to us all to have one among us who can
    empty a canakin so lustily."

    So they talked among themselves merrily, until after a while quoth
    Little John, "Who rideth those two nags yonder?"

    "Two holy men like thee, brother," quoth the Beggar. "They are now
    having a goodly feast within, for I smelled the steam of a boiled
    pullet just now. The landlady sayeth they come from Fountain Abbey, in
    Yorkshire, and go to Lincoln on matters of business."

    "They are a merry couple," said the Tinker, "for one is as lean as an
    old wife's spindle, and the other as fat as a suet pudding."

    "Talking of fatness," said the Peddler, "thou thyself lookest none too
    ill-fed, holy friar."

    "Nay, truly," said Little John, "thou seest in me what the holy Saint
    Dunstan can do for them that serve him upon a handful of parched peas
    and a trickle of cold water."

    At this a great shout of laughter went up. "Truly, it is a wondrous
    thing," quoth the Beggar, "I would have made my vow, to see the masterly
    manner in which thou didst tuck away yon pot of ale, that thou hadst not
    tasted clear water for a brace of months. Has not this same holy Saint
    Dunstan taught thee a goodly song or two?"

    "Why, as for that," quoth Little John, grinning, "mayhap he hath lent me
    aid to learn a ditty or so."

    "Then, prythee, let us hear how he hath taught thee," quoth the Tinker.

    At this Little John cleared his throat and, after a word or two about a
    certain hoarseness that troubled him, sang thus:

         "_Ah, pretty, pretty maid, whither dost thou go?
         I prythee, prythee, wait for thy lover also,
         And we'll gather the rose
         As it sweetly blows,
         For the merry, merry winds are blo-o-o-wing_."

    Now it seemed as though Little John's songs were never to get sung, for
    he had got no farther than this when the door of the inn opened and out
    came the two brothers of Fountain Abbey, the landlord following them,
    and, as the saying is, washing his hands with humble soap. But when the
    brothers of Fountain Abbey saw who it was that sang, and how he was
    clad in the robes of a Gray Friar, they stopped suddenly, the fat little
    Brother drawing his heavy eyebrows together in a mighty frown, and the
    thin Brother twisting up his face as though he had sour beer in his
    mouth. Then, as Little John gathered his breath for a new verse, "How,
    now," roared forth the fat Brother, his voice coming from him like loud
    thunder from a little cloud, "thou naughty fellow, is this a fit place
    for one in thy garb to tipple and sing profane songs?"

    "Nay," quoth Little John, "sin' I cannot tipple and sing, like Your
    Worship's reverence, in such a goodly place as Fountain Abbey, I must
    e'en tipple and sing where I can."

    "Now, out upon thee," cried the tall lean Brother in a harsh voice,
    "now, out upon thee, that thou shouldst so disgrace thy cloth by this
    talk and bearing."

    "Marry, come up!" quoth Little John. "Disgrace, sayest thou? Methinks it
    is more disgrace for one of our garb to wring hard-earned farthings out
    of the gripe of poor lean peasants. It is not so, brother?"

    At this the Tinker and the Peddler and the Beggar nudged one another,
    and all grinned, and the friars scowled blackly at Little John; but they
    could think of nothing further to say, so they turned to their horses.
    Then Little John arose of a sudden from the bench where he sat, and ran
    to where the brothers of Fountain Abbey were mounting. Quoth he, "Let
    me hold your horses' bridles for you. Truly, your words have smitten my
    sinful heart, so that I will abide no longer in this den of evil, but
    will go forward with you. No vile temptation, I wot, will fall upon me
    in such holy company."

    "Nay, fellow," said the lean Brother harshly, for he saw that Little
    John made sport of them, "we want none of thy company, so get thee
    gone."

    "Alas," quoth Little John, "I am truly sorry that ye like me not nor
    my company, but as for leaving you, it may not be, for my heart is so
    moved, that, willy-nilly, I must go with you for the sake of your holy
    company."

    Now, at this talk all the good fellows on the bench grinned till their
    teeth glistened, and even the landlord could not forbear to smile. As
    for the friars, they looked at one another with a puzzled look, and knew
    not what to do in the matter. They were so proud that it made them feel
    sick with shame to think of riding along the highroad with a strolling
    friar, in robes all too short for him, running beside them, but yet they
    could not make Little John stay against his will, for they knew he could
    crack the bones of both of them in a twinkling were he so minded. Then
    up spake the fat Brother more mildly than he had done before. "Nay, good
    brother," said he, "we will ride fast, and thou wilt tire to death at
    the pace."

    "Truly, I am grateful to thee for the thought of me," quoth Little John,
    "but have no fear, brother; my limbs are stout, and I could run like a
    hare from here to Gainsborough."

    At these words a sound of laughing came from the bench, whereat the lean
    Brother's wrath boiled over, like water into the fire, with great fuss
    and noise. "Now, out upon thee, thou naughty fellow!" he cried. "Art
    thou not ashamed to bring disgrace so upon our cloth? Bide thee here,
    thou sot, with these porkers. Thou art no fit company for us."

    "La, ye there now!" quoth Little John. "Thou hearest, landlord; thou art
    not fit company for these holy men; go back to thine alehouse. Nay, if
    these most holy brothers of mine do but give me the word, I'll beat thy
    head with this stout staff till it is as soft as whipped eggs."

    At these words a great shout of laughter went up from those on the
    bench, and the landlord's face grew red as a cherry from smothering his
    laugh in his stomach; but he kept his merriment down, for he wished
    not to bring the ill-will of the brothers of Fountain Abbey upon him
    by unseemly mirth. So the two brethren, as they could do nought else,
    having mounted their nags, turned their noses toward Lincoln and rode
    away.

    "I cannot stay longer, sweet friends," quoth Little John, as he pushed
    in betwixt the two cobs, "therefore I wish you good den. Off we go,
    we three." So saying, he swung his stout staff over his shoulder and
    trudged off, measuring his pace with that of the two nags.

    The two brothers glowered at Little John when he so pushed himself
    betwixt them, then they drew as far away from him as they could, so
    that the yeoman walked in the middle of the road, while they rode on the
    footpath on either side of the way. As they so went away, the Tinker,
    the Peddler, and the Beggar ran skipping out into the middle of the
    highway, each with a pot in his hand, and looked after them laughing.

    While they were in sight of those at the inn, the brothers walked their
    horses soberly, not caring to make ill matters worse by seeming to run
    away from Little John, for they could not but think how it would sound
    in folks' ears when they heard how the brethren of Fountain Abbey
    scampered away from a strolling friar, like the Ugly One, when the
    blessed Saint Dunstan loosed his nose from the red-hot tongs where he
    had held it fast; but when they had crossed the crest of the hill and
    the inn was lost to sight, quoth the fat Brother to the thin Brother,
    "Brother Ambrose, had we not better mend our pace?"

    "Why truly, gossip," spoke up Little John, "methinks it would be well to
    boil our pot a little faster, for the day is passing on. So it will not
    jolt thy fat too much, onward, say I."

    At this the two friars said nothing, but they glared again on Little
    John with baleful looks; then, without another word, they clucked to
    their horses, and both broke into a canter. So they galloped for a mile
    and more, and Little John ran betwixt them as lightly as a stag and
    never turned a hair with the running. At last the fat Brother drew his
    horse's rein with a groan, for he could stand the shaking no longer.
    "Alas," said Little John, with not so much as a catch in his breath, "I
    did sadly fear that the roughness of this pace would shake thy poor old
    fat paunch."

    To this the fat Friar said never a word, but he stared straight before
    him, and he gnawed his nether lip. And now they traveled forward more
    quietly, Little John in the middle of the road whistling merrily to
    himself, and the two friars in the footpath on either side saying never
    a word.

    Then presently they met three merry minstrels, all clad in red, who
    stared amain to see a Gray Friar with such short robes walking in the
    middle of the road, and two brothers with heads bowed with shame,
    riding upon richly caparisoned cobs on the footpaths. When they had
    come near to the minstrels, Little John waved his staff like an usher
    clearing the way. "Make way!" he cried in a loud voice. "Make way! make
    way! For here we go, we three!" Then how the minstrels stared, and how
    they laughed! But the fat Friar shook as with an ague, and the lean
    Friar bowed his head over his horse's neck.

    Then next they met two noble knights in rich array, with hawk on wrist,
    and likewise two fair ladies clad in silks and velvets, all a-riding on
    noble steeds. These all made room, staring, as Little John and the two
    friars came along the road. To them Little John bowed humbly. "Give you
    greetings, lords and ladies," said he. "But here we go, we three."

    Then all laughed, and one of the fair ladies cried out, "What three
    meanest thou, merry friend?"

    Little John looked over his shoulder, for they had now passed each
    other, and he called back, "Big Jack, lean Jack and fat Jack-pudding."

    At this the fat Friar gave a groan and seemed as if he were like to fall
    from his saddle for shame; the other brother said nothing, but he looked
    before him with a grim and stony look.

    Just ahead of them the road took a sudden turn around a high hedge, and
    some twoscore paces beyond the bend another road crossed the one they
    were riding upon. When they had come to the crossroad and were well away
    from those they had left, the lean Friar drew rein suddenly. "Look ye,
    fellow," quoth he in a voice quivering with rage, "we have had enough
    of thy vile company, and care no longer to be made sport of. Go thy way,
    and let us go ours in peace."

    "La there, now!" quoth Little John. "Methought we were such a merry
    company, and here thou dost blaze up like fat in the pan. But truly, I
    ha' had enow of you today, though I can ill spare your company. I know
    ye will miss me, but gin ye want me again, whisper to Goodman Wind, and
    he will bring news thereof to me. But ye see I am a poor man and ye are
    rich. I pray you give me a penny or two to buy me bread and cheese at
    the next inn."

    "We have no money, fellow," said the lean Friar harshly. "Come, Brother
    Thomas, let us forward."

    But Little John caught the horses by the bridle reins, one in either
    hand. "Ha' ye in truth no money about you whatsoever?" said he. "Now, I
    pray you, brothers, for charity's sake, give me somewhat to buy a crust
    of bread, e'en though it be only a penny."

    "I tell thee, fellow, we have no money," thundered the fat little Friar
    with the great voice.

    "Ha' ye, in holy truth, no money?" asked Little John.

    "Not a farthing," said the lean Friar sourly.

    "Not a groat," said the fat Friar loudly.

    "Nay," quoth Little John, "this must not be. Far be it from me to see
    such holy men as ye are depart from me with no money. Get both of you
    down straightway from off your horses, and we will kneel here in the
    middle of the crossroads and pray the blessed Saint Dunstan to send us
    some money to carry us on our journey."

    "What sayest thou, thou limb of evil!" cried the lean Friar, fairly
    gnashing his teeth with rage. "Doss thou bid me, the high cellarer of
    Fountain Abbey, to get down from my horse and kneel in the dirty road to
    pray to some beggarly Saxon saint?"

    "Now," quoth Little John, "I ha' a great part of a mind to crack thy
    head for thee for speaking thus of the good Saint Dunstan! But get down
    straightway, for my patience will not last much longer, and I may forget
    that ye are both in holy orders." So saying, he twirled his stout staff
    till it whistled again.

    At this speech both friars grew as pale as dough. Down slipped the
    fat Brother from off his horse on one side, and down slipped the lean
    Brother on the other.

    "Now, brothers, down on your knees and pray," said Little John;
    thereupon, putting his heavy hands upon the shoulder of each, he forced
    them to their knees, he kneeling also. Then Little John began to beseech
    Saint Dunstan for money, which he did in a great loud voice. After he
    had so besought the Saint for a time, he bade the friars feel in their
    pouches and see if the Saint had sent them anything; so each put his
    hand slowly in the pouch that hung beside him, but brought nothing
    thence.

    "Ha!" quoth Little John, "have your prayers so little virtue? Then let
    us at it again." Then straightway he began calling on Saint Dunstan
    again, somewhat in this wise: "O gracious Saint Dunstan! Send some money
    straightway to these poor folk, lest the fat one waste away and grow as
    lean as the lean one, and the lean one waste away to nothing at all, ere
    they get to Lincoln Town; but send them only ten shillings apiece, lest
    they grow puffed up with pride, Any more than that that thou sendest,
    send to me.

    "Now," quoth he, rising, "let us see what each man hath." Then he thrust
    his hand into his pouch and drew thence four golden angels. "What have
    ye, brothers?" said he.

    Then once again each friar slowly thrust his hand into his pouch, and
    once again brought it out with nothing in it.

    "Have ye nothing?" quoth Little John. "Nay, I warrant there is somewhat
    that hath crept into the seams of your pouches, and so ye ha' missed it.
    Let me look."

    So he went first to the lean Friar, and, thrusting his hand into the
    pouch, he drew forth a leathern bag and counted therefrom one hundred
    and ten pounds of golden money. "I thought," quoth Little John, "that
    thou hadst missed, in some odd corner of thy pouch, the money that the
    blessed Saint had sent thee. And now let me see whether thou hast not
    some, also, brother." Thereupon he thrust his hand into the pouch of the
    fat Friar and drew thence a bag like the other and counted out from it
    threescore and ten pounds. "Look ye now," quoth he, "I knew the good
    Saint had sent thee some pittance that thou, also, hadst missed."

    Then, giving them one pound between them, he slipped the rest of the
    money into his own pouch, saying, "Ye pledged me your holy word that ye
    had no money. Being holy men, I trust that ye would not belie your word
    so pledged, therefore I know the good Saint Dunstan hath sent this in
    answer to my prayers. But as I only prayed for ten shillings to be sent
    to each of you, all over and above that belongeth by rights to me, and
    so I take it. I give you good den, brothers, and may ye have a pleasant
    journey henceforth." So saying, he turned and left them, striding away.
    The friars looked at one another with a woeful look, and slowly and
    sadly they mounted their horses again and rode away with never a word.

    But Little John turned his footsteps back again to Sherwood Forest, and
    merrily he whistled as he strode along.

    And now we will see what befell Robin Hood in his venture as beggar.




    Robin Hood Turns Beggar

    AFTER JOLLY ROBIN had left Little John at the forking of the roads, he
    walked merrily onward in the mellow sunshine that shone about him.
    Ever and anon he would skip and leap or sing a snatch of song, for pure
    joyousness of the day; for, because of the sweetness of the springtide,
    his heart was as lusty within him as that of a colt newly turned out
    to grass. Sometimes he would walk a long distance, gazing aloft at the
    great white swelling clouds that moved slowly across the deep blue sky;
    anon he would stop and drink in the fullness of life of all things, for
    the hedgerows were budding tenderly and the grass of the meadows was
    waxing long and green; again he would stand still and listen to the
    pretty song of the little birds in the thickets or hearken to the clear
    crow of the cock daring the sky to rain, whereat he would laugh, for it
    took but little to tickle Robin's heart into merriment. So he trudged
    manfully along, ever willing to stop for this reason or for that, and
    ever ready to chat with such merry lasses as he met now and then. So
    the morning slipped along, but yet he met no beggar with whom he could
    change clothes. Quoth he, "If I do not change my luck in haste, I am
    like to have an empty day of it, for it is well nigh half gone already,
    and, although I have had a merry walk through the countryside, I know
    nought of a beggar's life."

    Then, after a while, he began to grow hungry, whereupon his mind turned
    from thoughts of springtime and flowers and birds and dwelled
    upon boiled capons, Malmsey, white bread, and the like, with great
    tenderness. Quoth he to himself, "I would I had Willie Wynkin's wishing
    coat; I know right well what I should wish for, and this it should be."
    Here he marked upon the fingers of his left hand with the forefinger of
    his right hand those things which he wished for. "Firstly, I would have
    a sweet brown pie of tender larks; mark ye, not dry cooked, but with
    a good sop of gravy to moisten it withal. Next, I would have a pretty
    pullet, fairly boiled, with tender pigeons' eggs, cunningly sliced,
    garnishing the platter around. With these I would have a long, slim loaf
    of wheaten bread that hath been baked upon the hearth; it should be warm
    from the fire, with glossy brown crust, the color of the hair of mine
    own Maid Marian, and this same crust should be as crisp and brittle as
    the thin white ice that lies across the furrows in the early winter's
    morning. These will do for the more solid things; but with these I must
    have three potties, fat and round, one full of Malmsey, one of Canary,
    and one brimming full of mine own dear lusty sack." Thus spoke Robin to
    himself, his mouth growing moist at the corners with the thoughts of the
    good things he had raised in his own mind.

    So, talking to himself, he came to where the dusty road turned sharply
    around the hedge, all tender with the green of the coming leaf, and
    there he saw before him a stout fellow sitting upon a stile, swinging
    his legs in idleness. All about this lusty rogue dangled divers pouches
    and bags of different sizes and kinds, a dozen or more, with great,
    wide, gaping mouths, like a brood of hungry daws. His coat was gathered
    in at his waist, and was patched with as many colors as there are
    stripes upon a Maypole in the springtide. On his head he wore a great
    tall leathern cap, and across his knees rested a stout quarterstaff of
    blackthorn, full as long and heavy as Robin's. As jolly a beggar was he
    as ever trod the lanes and byways of Nottinghamshire, for his eyes were
    as gray as slate, and snapped and twinkled and danced with merriment,
    and his black hair curled close all over his head in little rings of
    kinkiness.

    "Halloa, good fellow," quoth Robin, when he had come nigh to the other,
    "what art thou doing here this merry day, when the flowers are peeping
    and the buds are swelling?"

    Then the other winked one eye and straightway trolled forth in a merry
    voice:

         "_I sit upon the stile,
         And I sing a little while
         As I wait for my own true dear, O,
         For the sun is shining bright,
         And the leaves are dancing light,
         And the little fowl sings she is near, O_.

    "And so it is with me, bully boy, saving that my doxy cometh not."

    "Now that is a right sweet song," quoth Robin, "and, were I in the right
    mind to listen to thee, I could bear well to hear more; but I have two
    things of seriousness to ask of thee; so listen, I prythee."

    At this the jolly Beggar cocked his head on one side, like a rogue of
    a magpie. Quoth he, "I am an ill jug to pour heavy things into, good
    friend, and, if I mistake not, thou hast few serious words to spare at
    any time."

    "Nay," quoth jolly Robin, "what I would say first is the most serious
    of all thoughts to me, to wit, 'Where shall I get somewhat to eat and
    drink?'"

    "Sayst thou so?" quoth the Beggar. "Marry, I make no such serious
    thoughts upon the matter. I eat when I can get it, and munch my crust
    when I can get no crumb; likewise, when there is no ale to be had I wash
    the dust from out my throat with a trickle of cold water. I was sitting
    here, as thou camest upon me, bethinking myself whether I should break
    my fast or no. I do love to let my hunger grow mightily keen ere I eat,
    for then a dry crust is as good to me as a venison pasty with suet and
    raisins is to stout King Harry. I have a sharp hunger upon me now, but
    methinks in a short while it will ripen to a right mellow appetite."

    "Now, in good sooth," quoth merry Robin, laughing, "thou hast a quaint
    tongue betwixt thy teeth. But hast thou truly nought but a dry crust
    about thee? Methinks thy bags and pouches are fat and lusty for such
    thin fare."

    "Why, mayhap there is some other cold fare therein," said the Beggar
    slyly.

    "And hast thou nought to drink but cold water?" said Robin.

    "Never so much as a drop," quoth the Beggar. "Over beyond yon clump of
    trees is as sweet a little inn as ever thou hast lifted eyelid upon; but
    I go not thither, for they have a nasty way with me. Once, when the good
    Prior of Emmet was dining there, the landlady set a dear little tart of
    stewed crabs and barley sugar upon the window sill to cool, and, seeing
    it there, and fearing it might be lost, I took it with me till that I
    could find the owner thereof. Ever since then they have acted very ill
    toward me; yet truth bids me say that they have the best ale there that
    ever rolled over my tongue."

    At this Robin laughed aloud. "Marry," quoth he, "they did ill toward
    thee for thy kindness. But tell me truly, what hast thou in thy
    pouches?"

    "Why," quoth the Beggar, peeping into the mouths of his bags, "I find
    here a goodly piece of pigeon pie, wrapped in a cabbage leaf to hold the
    gravy. Here I behold a dainty streaked piece of brawn, and here a fair
    lump of white bread. Here I find four oaten cakes and a cold knuckle of
    ham. Ha! In sooth, 'tis strange; but here I behold six eggs that must
    have come by accident from some poultry yard hereabouts. They are raw,
    but roasted upon the coals and spread with a piece of butter that I
    see - "

    "Peace, good friend!" cried Robin, holding up his hand. "Thou makest my
    poor stomach quake with joy for what thou tellest me so sweetly. If thou
    wilt give me to eat, I will straightway hie me to that little inn thou
    didst tell of but now, and will bring a skin of ale for thy drinking and
    mine."

    "Friend, thou hast said enough," said the Beggar, getting down from
    the stile. "I will feast thee with the best that I have and bless Saint
    Cedric for thy company. But, sweet chuck, I prythee bring three quarts
    of ale at least, one for thy drinking and two for mine, for my thirst is
    such that methinks I can drink ale as the sands of the River Dee drink
    salt water."

    So Robin straightway left the Beggar, who, upon his part, went to a
    budding lime bush back of the hedge, and there spread his feast upon
    the grass and roasted his eggs upon a little fagot fire, with a deftness
    gained by long labor in that line. After a while back came Robin bearing
    a goodly skin of ale upon his shoulder, which he laid upon the grass.
    Then, looking upon the feast spread upon the ground - and a fair sight it
    was to look upon - he slowly rubbed his hand over his stomach, for to his
    hungry eyes it seemed the fairest sight that he had beheld in all his
    life.

    "Friend," said the Beggar, "let me feel the weight of that skin.

    "Yea, truly," quoth Robin, "help thyself, sweet chuck, and meantime let
    me see whether thy pigeon pie is fresh or no."

    So the one seized upon the ale and the other upon the pigeon pie, and
    nothing was heard for a while but the munching of food and the gurgle of
    ale as it left the skin.

    At last, after a long time had passed thus, Robin pushed the food from
    him and heaved a great sigh of deep content, for he felt as though he
    had been made all over anew.

    "And now, good friend," quoth he, leaning upon one elbow, "I would have
    at thee about that other matter of seriousness of which I spoke not long
    since."

    "How!" said the Beggar reproachfully, "thou wouldst surely not talk of
    things appertaining to serious affairs upon such ale as this!"

    "Nay," quoth Robin, laughing. "I would not check thy thirst, sweet
    friend; drink while I talk to thee. Thus it is: I would have thee know
    that I have taken a liking to thy craft and would fain have a taste of a
    beggar's life mine own self."

    Said the Beggar, "I marvel not that thou hast taken a liking to my
    manner of life, good fellow, but 'to like' and 'to do' are two
    matters of different sorts. I tell thee, friend, one must serve a
    long apprenticeship ere one can learn to be even so much as a
    clapper-dudgeon, much less a crank or an Abraham-man. (3) I tell thee,
    lad, thou art too old to enter upon that which it may take thee years to
    catch the hang of."

         (3) Classes of traveling mendicants that infested England as
         late as the middle of the seventeenth century. VIDE Dakkar's
         ENGLISH VILLAINIES, etc.

    "Mayhap that may be so," quoth Robin, "for I bring to mind that Gaffer
    Swanthold sayeth Jack Shoemaker maketh ill bread; Tom Baker maketh ill
    shoon. Nevertheless, I have a mind to taste a beggar's life, and need
    but the clothing to be as good as any."

    "I tell thee, fellow," said the Beggar, "if thou wert clad as sweetly
    as good Saint Wynten, the patron of our craft, thou wouldst never make
    a beggar. Marry, the first jolly traveler that thou wouldst meet
    would beat thee to a pudding for thrusting thy nose into a craft that
    belongeth not to thee."

    "Nevertheless," quoth Robin, "I would have a try at it; and methinks I
    shall change clothes with thee, for thy garb seemeth to be pretty, not
    to say gay. So not only will I change clothes, but I will give thee two
    golden angels to boot. I have brought my stout staff with me, thinking
    that I might have to rap some one of the brethren of thy cloth over the
    head by way of argument in this matter, but I love thee so much for the
    feast thou hast given me that I would not lift even my little finger
    against thee, so thou needst not have a crumb of fear."

    To this the Beggar listened with his knuckles resting against his hips,
    and when Robin had ended he cocked his head on one side and thrust his
    tongue into his cheek.

    "Marry, come up," quoth he at last. "Lift thy finger against me,
    forsooth! Art thou out of thy wits, man? My name is Riccon Hazel, and I
    come from Holywell, in Flintshire, over by the River Dee. I tell thee,
    knave, I have cracked the head of many a better man than thou art, and
    even now I would scald thy crown for thee but for the ale thou hast
    given me. Now thou shalt not have so much as one tag-rag of my coat,
    even could it save thee from hanging."

    "Now, fellow," said Robin, "it would ill suit me to spoil thy pretty
    head for thee, but I tell thee plainly, that but for this feast I would
    do that to thee would stop thy traveling the country for many a day to
    come. Keep thy lips shut, lad, or thy luck will tumble out of thy mouth
    with thy speech!"

    "Now out, and alas for thee, man, for thou hast bred thyself ill this
    day!" cried the Beggar, rising and taking up his staff. "Take up thy
    club and defend thyself, fellow, for I will not only beat thee but I
    will take from thee thy money and leave thee not so much as a clipped
    groat to buy thyself a lump of goose grease to rub thy cracked crown
    withal. So defend thyself, I say."

    Then up leaped merry Robin and snatched up his staff also. "Take my
    money, if thou canst," quoth he. "I promise freely to give thee every
    farthing if thou dost touch me." And he twirled his staff in his fingers
    till it whistled again.

    Then the Beggar swung his staff also, and struck a mighty blow at Robin,
    which the yeoman turned. Three blows the Beggar struck, yet never one
    touched so much as a hair of Robin's head. Then stout Robin saw his
    chance, and, ere you could count three, Riccon's staff was over the
    hedge, and Riccon himself lay upon the green grass with no more motion
    than you could find in an empty pudding bag.

    "How now!" quoth merry Robin, laughing. "Wilt thou have my hide or my
    money, sweet chuck?" But to this the other answered never a word. Then
    Robin, seeing his plight, and that he was stunned with the blow, ran,
    still laughing, and brought the skin of ale and poured some of it on the
    Beggar's head and some down his throat, so that presently he opened his
    eyes and looked around as though wondering why he lay upon his back.

    Then Robin, seeing that he had somewhat gathered the wits that had just
    been rapped out of his head, said, "Now, good fellow, wilt thou change
    clothes with me, or shall I have to tap thee again? Here are two golden
    angels if thou wilt give me freely all thy rags and bags and thy cap
    and things. If thou givest them not freely, I much fear me I shall have
    to - " and he looked up and down his staff.

    Then Riccon sat up and rubbed the bump on his crown. "Now, out upon it!"
    quoth he. "I did think to drub thee sweetly, fellow. I know not how it
    is, but I seem, as it were, to have bought more beer than I can drink.
    If I must give up my clothes, I must, but first promise me, by thy word
    as a true yeoman, that thou wilt take nought from me but my clothes."

    "I promise on the word of a true yeoman," quoth Robin, thinking that the
    fellow had a few pennies that he would save.

    Thereupon the Beggar drew a little knife that hung at his side and,
    ripping up the lining of his coat, drew thence ten bright golden pounds,
    which he laid upon the ground beside him with a cunning wink at Robin.
    "Now thou mayst have my clothes and welcome," said he, "and thou
    mightest have had them in exchange for thine without the cost of a
    single farthing, far less two golden angels."

    "Marry," quoth Robin, laughing, "thou art a sly fellow, and I tell thee
    truly, had I known thou hadst so much money by thee maybe thou mightst
    not have carried it away, for I warrant thou didst not come honestly by
    it."

    Then each stripped off his clothes and put on those of the other, and as
    lusty a beggar was Robin Hood as e'er you could find of a summer's day.
    But stout Riccon of Holywell skipped and leaped and danced for joy of
    the fair suit of Lincoln green that he had so gotten. Quoth he, "I am a
    gay-feathered bird now. Truly, my dear Moll Peascod would never know me
    in this dress. Thou mayst keep the cold pieces of the feast, friend, for
    I mean to live well and lustily while my money lasts and my clothes are
    gay."

    So he turned and left Robin and, crossing the stile, was gone, but Robin
    heard him singing from beyond the hedge as he strode away:

         "_For Polly is smiling and Molly is glad
         When the beggar comes in at the door,
         And Jack and Dick call him a fine lusty lad,
         And the hostess runs up a great score.

         "Then hey, Willy Waddykin,
         Stay, Billy Waddykin,
         And let the brown ale flow free, flow free,
         The beggar's the man for me_."

    Robin listened till the song ended in the distance, then he also crossed
    the stile into the road, but turned his toes away from where the Beggar
    had gone. The road led up a gentle hill and up the hill Robin walked, a
    half score or more of bags dangling about his legs. Onward he strolled
    for a long time, but other adventure he found not. The road was bare
    of all else but himself, as he went kicking up little clouds of dust at
    each footstep; for it was noontide, the most peaceful time of all the
    day, next to twilight. All the earth was silent in the restfulness of
    eating time; the plowhorses stood in the furrow munching, with great
    bags over their noses holding sweet food, the plowman sat under the
    hedge and the plowboy also, and they, too, were munching, each one
    holding a great piece of bread in one fist and a great piece of cheese
    in the other.

    So Robin, with all the empty road to himself, strode along whistling
    merrily, his bags and pouches bobbing and dangling at his thighs. At
    last he came to where a little grass-grown path left the road and,
    passing through a stile and down a hill, led into a little dell and on
    across a rill in the valley and up the hill on the other side, till it
    reached a windmill that stood on the cap of the rise where the wind bent
    the trees in swaying motion. Robin looked at the spot and liked it, and,
    for no reason but that his fancy led him, he took the little path and
    walked down the grassy sunny slope of the open meadow, and so came to
    the little dingle and, ere he knew it, upon four lusty fellows that sat
    with legs outstretched around a goodly feast spread upon the ground.

    Four merry beggars were they, and each had slung about his neck a little
    board that rested upon his breast. One board had written upon it, "I
    am blind," another, "I am deaf," another, "I am dumb," and the fourth,
    "Pity the lame one." But although all these troubles written upon the
    boards seemed so grievous, the four stout fellows sat around feasting
    as merrily as though Cain's wife had never opened the pottle that held
    misfortunes and let them forth like a cloud of flies to pester us.

    The deaf man was the first to hear Robin, for he said, "Hark, brothers,
    I hear someone coming." And the blind man was the first to see him,
    for he said, "He is an honest man, brothers, and one of like craft to
    ourselves." Then the dumb man called to him in a great voice and said,
    "Welcome, brother; come and sit while there is still some of the feast
    left and a little Malmsey in the pottle." At this, the lame man, who
    had taken off his wooden leg and unstrapped his own leg, and was sitting
    with it stretched out upon the grass so as to rest it, made room for
    Robin among them. "We are glad to see thee, brother," said he, holding
    out the flask of Malmsey.

    "Marry," quoth Robin, laughing, and weighing the flask in his hands ere
    he drank, "methinks it is no more than seemly of you all to be glad
    to see me, seeing that I bring sight to the blind, speech to the dumb,
    hearing to the deaf, and such a lusty leg to a lame man. I drink to your
    happiness, brothers, as I may not drink to your health, seeing ye are
    already hale, wind and limb."

    At this all grinned, and the Blind beggar, who was the chief man among
    them, and was the broadest shouldered and most lusty rascal of all,
    smote Robin upon the shoulder, swearing he was a right merry wag.

    "Whence comest thou, lad?" asked the Dumb man.

    "Why," quoth Robin, "I came this morning from sleeping overnight in
    Sherwood."

    "Is it even so?" said the Deaf man. "I would not for all the money we
    four are carrying to Lincoln Town sleep one night in Sherwood. If Robin
    Hood caught one of our trade in his woodlands he would, methinks, clip
    his ears."

    "Methinks he would, too," quoth Robin, laughing. "But what money is this
    that ye speak of?"

    Then up spake the Lame man. "Our king, Peter of York," said he, "hath
    sent us to Lincoln with those moneys that - "

    "Stay, brother Hodge," quoth the Blind man, breaking into the talk, "I
    would not doubt our brother here, but bear in mind we know him not. What
    art thou, brother? Upright-man, Jurkman, Clapper-dudgeon, Dommerer, or
    Abraham-man?"

    At these words Robin looked from one man to the other with mouth agape.
    "Truly," quoth he, "I trust I am an upright man, at least, I strive to
    be; but I know not what thou meanest by such jargon, brother. It were
    much more seemly, methinks, if yon Dumb man, who hath a sweet voice,
    would give us a song."

    At these words a silence fell on all, and after a while the Blind man
    spoke again. Quoth he, "Thou dost surely jest when thou sayest that thou
    dost not understand such words. Answer me this: Hast thou ever fibbed a
    chouse quarrons in the Rome pad for the loure in his bung?"(4)

         (4) I.E., in old beggar's cant, "beaten a man or gallant
         upon the highway for the money in his purse."  Dakkar's
         ENGLISH VILLAINIES.

    "Now out upon it," quoth Robin Hood testily, "an ye make sport of me by
    pattering such gibberish, it will be ill for you all, I tell you. I have
    the best part of a mind to crack the heads of all four of you, and would
    do so, too, but for the sweet Malmsey ye have given me. Brother, pass
    the pottle lest it grow cold."

    But all the four beggars leaped to their feet when Robin had done
    speaking, and the Blind man snatched up a heavy knotted cudgel that lay
    beside him on the grass, as did the others likewise. Then Robin, seeing
    that things were like to go ill with him, albeit he knew not what all
    the coil was about, leaped to his feet also and, catching up his trusty
    staff, clapped his back against the tree and stood upon his guard
    against them. "How, now!" cried he, twirling his staff betwixt his
    fingers, "would you four stout fellows set upon one man? Stand back, ye
    rascals, or I will score your pates till they have as many marks upon
    them as a pothouse door! Are ye mad? I have done you no harm."

    "Thou liest!" quoth the one who pretended to be blind and who, being the
    lustiest villain, was the leader of the others, "thou liest! For thou
    hast come among us as a vile spy. But thine ears have heard too much for
    thy body's good, and thou goest not forth from this place unless thou
    goest feet foremost, for this day thou shalt die! Come, brothers, all
    together! Down with him!" Then, whirling up his cudgel, he rushed upon
    Robin as an angry bull rushes upon a red rag. But Robin was ready for
    any happening. "Crick! Crack!" he struck two blows as quick as a wink,
    and down went the Blind man, rolling over and over upon the grass.

    At this the others bore back and stood at a little distance scowling
    upon Robin. "Come on, ye scum!" cried he merrily. "Here be cakes and ale
    for all. Now, who will be next served?"

    To this speech the beggars answered never a word, but they looked at
    Robin as great Blunderbore looked upon stout Jack the slayer of giants,
    as though they would fain eat him, body and bones; nevertheless, they
    did not care to come nigher to him and his terrible staff. Then, seeing
    them so hesitate, Robin of a sudden leaped upon them, striking even as
    he leaped. Down went the Dumb man, and away flew his cudgel from his
    hand as he fell. At this the others ducked to avoid another blow, then,
    taking to their heels, scampered, the one one way and the other the
    other, as though they had the west wind's boots upon their feet. Robin
    looked after them, laughing, and thought that never had he seen so fleet
    a runner as the Lame man; but neither of the beggars stopped nor turned
    around, for each felt in his mind the wind of Robin's cudgel about his
    ears.

    Then Robin turned to the two stout knaves lying upon the ground. Quoth
    he, "These fellows spake somewhat about certain moneys they were taking
    to Lincoln; methinks I may find it upon this stout blind fellow,
    who hath as keen sight as e'er a trained woodsman in Nottingham or
    Yorkshire. It were a pity to let sound money stay in the pockets of
    such thieving knaves." So saying, he stooped over the burly rascal and
    searched among his rags and tatters, till presently his fingers felt a
    leathern pouch slung around his body beneath his patched and tattered
    coat. This he stripped away and, weighing it in his hands, bethought
    himself that it was mighty heavy. "It were a sweet thing," said he to
    himself, "if this were filled with gold instead of copper pence." Then,
    sitting down upon the grass, he opened the pocket and looked into it.
    There he found four round rolls wrapped up in dressed sheepskin; one of
    these rolls he opened; then his mouth gaped and his eyes stared, I wot,
    as though they would never close again, for what did he see but fifty
    pounds of bright golden money? He opened the other pockets and found in
    each one the same, fifty bright new-stamped golden pounds. Quoth Robin,
    "I have oft heard that the Beggars' Guild was over-rich, but never did
    I think that they sent such sums as this to their treasury. I shall take
    it with me, for it will be better used for charity and the good of my
    merry band than in the enriching of such knaves as these." So saying, he
    rolled up the money in the sheepskin again, and putting it back in the
    purse, he thrust the pouch into his own bosom. Then taking up the flask
    of Malmsey, he held it toward the two fellows lying on the grass, and
    quoth he, "Sweet friends, I drink your health and thank you dearly for
    what ye have so kindly given me this day, and so I wish you good den."
    Then, taking up his staff, he left the spot and went merrily on his way.

    But when the two stout beggars that had been rapped upon the head roused
    themselves and sat up, and when the others had gotten over their fright
    and come back, they were as sad and woebegone as four frogs in dry
    weather, for two of them had cracked crowns, their Malmsey was all gone,
    and they had not so much as a farthing to cross their palms withal.

    But after Robin left the little dell he strode along merrily, singing as
    he went; and so blithe was he and such a stout beggar, and, withal, so
    fresh and clean, that every merry lass he met had a sweet word for him
    and felt no fear, while the very dogs, that most times hate the sight
    of a beggar, snuffed at his legs in friendly wise and wagged their tails
    pleasantly; for dogs know an honest man by his smell, and an honest man
    Robin was - in his own way.

    Thus he went along till at last he had come to the wayside cross nigh
    Ollerton, and, being somewhat tired, he sat him down to rest upon the
    grassy bank in front of it. "It groweth nigh time," quoth he to himself,
    "that I were getting back again to Sherwood; yet it would please me well
    to have one more merry adventure ere I go back again to my jolly band."

    So he looked up the road and down the road to see who might come, until
    at last he saw someone drawing near, riding upon a horse. When the
    traveler came nigh enough for him to see him well, Robin laughed, for a
    strange enough figure he cut. He was a thin, wizened man, and, to look
    upon him, you could not tell whether he was thirty years old or sixty,
    so dried up was he even to skin and bone. As for the nag, it was as thin
    as the rider, and both looked as though they had been baked in Mother
    Huddle's Oven, where folk are dried up so that they live forever.

    But although Robin laughed at the droll sight, he knew the wayfarer
    to be a certain rich corn engrosser of Worksop, who more than once had
    bought all the grain in the countryside and held it till it reached even
    famine prices, thus making much money from the needs of poor people, and
    for this he was hated far and near by everyone that knew aught of him.

    So, after a while, the Corn Engrosser came riding up to where Robin sat;
    whereupon merry Robin stepped straightway forth, in all his rags and
    tatters, his bags and pouches dangling about him, and laid his hand upon
    the horse's bridle rein, calling upon the other to stop.

    "Who art thou, fellow, that doth dare to stop me thus upon the King's
    highway?" said the lean man, in a dry, sour voice.

    "Pity a poor beggar," quoth Robin. "Give me but a farthing to buy me a
    piece of bread."

    "Now, out upon thee!" snarled the other. "Such sturdy rogues as thou art
    are better safe in the prisons or dancing upon nothing, with a hempen
    collar about the neck, than strolling the highways so freely."

    "Tut," quoth Robin, "how thou talkest! Thou and I are brothers, man. Do
    we not both take from the poor people that which they can ill spare? Do
    we not make our livings by doing nought of any good? Do we not both live
    without touching palm to honest work? Have we either of us ever rubbed
    thumbs over honestly gained farthings? Go to! We are brothers, I say;
    only thou art rich and I am poor; wherefore, I prythee once more, give
    me a penny."

    "Doss thou prate so to me, sirrah?" cried the Corn Engrosser in a rage.
    "Now I will have thee soundly whipped if ever I catch thee in any town
    where the law can lay hold of thee! As for giving thee a penny, I swear
    to thee that I have not so much as a single groat in my purse. Were
    Robin Hood himself to take me, he might search me from crown to heel
    without finding the smallest piece of money upon me. I trust I am too
    sly to travel so nigh to Sherwood with money in my pouch, and that thief
    at large in the woods."

    Then merry Robin looked up and down, as if to see that there was no one
    nigh, and then, coming close to the Corn Engrosser, he stood on tiptoe
    and spake in his ear, "Thinkest thou in sooth that I am a beggar, as I
    seem to be? Look upon me. There is not a grain of dirt upon my hands or
    my face or my body. Didst thou ever see a beggar so? I tell thee I am as
    honest a man as thou art. Look, friend." Here he took the purse of money
    from his breast and showed to the dazzled eyes of the Corn Engrosser the
    bright golden pieces. "Friend, these rags serve but to hide an honest
    rich man from the eyes of Robin Hood."

    "Put up thy money, lad," cried the other quickly. "Art thou a fool,
    to trust to beggar's rags to shield thee from Robin Hood? If he caught
    thee, he would strip thee to the skin, for he hates a lusty beggar as he
    doth a fat priest or those of my kind."

    "Is it indeed so?" quoth Robin. "Had I known this, mayhap I had not come
    hereabouts in this garb. But I must go forward now, as much depends upon
    my journeying. Where goest thou, friend?"

    "I go to Grantham," said the Corn Engrosser, "but I shall lodge tonight
    at Newark, if I can get so far upon my way."

    "Why, I myself am on the way to Newark," quoth merry Robin, "so that,
    as two honest men are better than one in roads beset by such a fellow as
    this Robin Hood, I will jog along with thee, if thou hast no dislike to
    my company."

    "Why, as thou art an honest fellow and a rich fellow," said the Corn
    Engrosser, "I mind not thy company; but, in sooth, I have no great
    fondness for beggars."

    "Then forward," quoth Robin, "for the day wanes and it will be dark ere
    we reach Newark." So off they went, the lean horse hobbling along as
    before, and Robin running beside, albeit he was so quaking with laughter
    within him that he could hardly stand; yet he dared not laugh aloud,
    lest the Corn Engrosser should suspect something. So they traveled along
    till they reached a hill just on the outskirts of Sherwood. Here the
    lean man checked his lean horse into a walk, for the road was steep, and
    he wished to save his nag's strength, having far to go ere he reached
    Newark. Then he turned in his saddle and spake to Robin again, for the
    first time since they had left the cross. "Here is thy greatest danger,
    friend," said he, "for here we are nighest to that vile thief Robin
    Hood, and the place where he dwells. Beyond this we come again to the
    open honest country, and so are more safe in our journeying."

    "Alas!" quoth Robin, "I would that I had as little money by me as thou
    hast, for this day I fear that Robin Hood will get every groat of my
    wealth."

    Then the other looked at Robin and winked cunningly. Quoth he, "I tell
    thee, friend, that I have nigh as much by me as thou hast, but it is
    hidden so that never a knave in Sherwood could find it."

    "Thou dost surely jest," quoth Robin. "How could one hide so much as two
    hundred pounds upon his person?"

    "Now, as thou art so honest a fellow, and, withal, so much younger than
    I am, I will tell thee that which I have told to no man in all the world
    before, and thus thou mayst learn never again to do such a foolish thing
    as to trust to beggar's garb to guard thee against Robin Hood. Seest
    thou these clogs upon my feet?"

    "Yea," quoth Robin, laughing, "truly, they are large enough for any man
    to see, even were his sight as foggy as that of Peter Patter, who never
    could see when it was time to go to work."

    "Peace, friend," said the Corn Engrosser, "for this is no matter for
    jesting. The soles of these clogs are not what they seem to be, for each
    one is a sweet little box; and by twisting the second nail from the toe,
    the upper of the shoe and part of the sole lifts up like a lid, and in
    the spaces within are fourscore and ten bright golden pounds in each
    shoe, all wrapped in hair, to keep them from clinking and so telling
    tales of themselves."

    When the Corn Engrosser had told this, Robin broke into a roar of
    laughter and, laying his hands upon the bridle rein, stopped the
    sad-looking nag. "Stay, good friend," quoth he, between bursts of
    merriment, "thou art the slyest old fox that e'er I saw in all
    my life! - In the soles of his shoon, quotha! - If ever I trust a
    poor-seeming man again, shave my head and paint it blue! A corn factor,
    a horse jockey, an estate agent, and a jackdaw for cunningness, say I!"
    And he laughed again till he shook in his shoes with mirth.

    All this time the Corn Engrosser had been staring at Robin, his mouth
    agape with wonder. "Art thou mad," quoth he, "to talk in this way, so
    loud and in such a place? Let us forward, and save thy mirth till we are
    safe and sound at Newark."

    "Nay," quoth Robin, the tears of merriment wet on his cheeks, "on second
    thoughts I go no farther than here, for I have good friends hereabouts.
    Thou mayst go forward if thou dost list, thou sweet pretty fellow, but
    thou must go forward barefoot, for I am afraid that thy shoon must be
    left behind. Off with them, friend, for I tell thee I have taken a great
    fancy to them."

    At these words the corn factor grew pale as a linen napkin. "Who art
    thou that talkest so?" said he.

    Then merry Robin laughed again, and quoth he, "Men hereabouts call me
    Robin Hood; so, sweet friend, thou hadst best do my bidding and give
    me thy shoes, wherefore hasten, I prythee, or else thou wilt not get to
    fair Newark Town till after dark."

    At the sound of the name of Robin Hood, the corn factor quaked with
    fear, so that he had to seize his horse by the mane to save himself
    from falling off its back. Then straightway, and without more words,
    he stripped off his clogs and let them fall upon the road. Robin, still
    holding the bridle rein, stooped and picked them up. Then he said,
    "Sweet friend, I am used to ask those that I have dealings with to
    come and feast at Sherwood with me. I will not ask thee, because of our
    pleasant journey together; for I tell thee there be those in Sherwood
    that would not be so gentle with thee as I have been. The name of Corn
    Engrosser leaves a nasty taste upon the tongue of all honest men. Take a
    fool's advice of me and come no more so nigh to Sherwood, or mayhap some
    day thou mayst of a sudden find a clothyard shaft betwixt thy ribs. So,
    with this, I give thee good den." Hereupon he clapped his hand to the
    horse's flank and off went nag and rider. But the man's face was all
    bedewed with the sweat of fright, and never again, I wot, was he found
    so close to Sherwood Forest as he had been this day.

    Robin stood and looked after him, and, when he was fairly gone, turned,
    laughing, and entered the forest carrying the shoes in his hand.

    That night in sweet Sherwood the red fires glowed brightly in wavering
    light on tree and bush, and all around sat or lay the stout fellows of
    the band to hear Robin Hood and Little John tell their adventures. All
    listened closely, and again and again the woods rang with shouts of
    laughter.

    When all was told, Friar Tuck spoke up. "Good master," said he, "thou
    hast had a pretty time, but still I hold to my saying, that the life of
    the barefoot friar is the merrier of the two."

    "Nay," quoth Will Stutely, "I hold with our master, that he hath had
    the pleasanter doings of the two, for he hath had two stout bouts at
    quarterstaff this day."

    So some of the band held with Robin Hood and some with Little John. As
    for me, I think - But I leave it with you to say for yourselves which you
    hold with.




    Robin Hood Shoots Before Queen Eleanor

    THE HIGHROAD stretched white and dusty in the hot summer afternoon sun,
    and the trees stood motionless along the roadside. All across the meadow
    lands the hot air danced and quivered, and in the limpid waters of
    the lowland brook, spanned by a little stone bridge, the fish hung
    motionless above the yellow gravel, and the dragonfly sat quite still,
    perched upon the sharp tip of a spike of the rushes, with its wings
    glistening in the sun.

    Along the road a youth came riding upon a fair milk-white barb, and the
    folk that he passed stopped and turned and looked after him, for never
    had so lovely a lad or one so gaily clad been seen in Nottingham before.
    He could not have been more than sixteen years of age, and was as fair
    as any maiden. His long yellow hair flowed behind him as he rode along,
    all clad in silk and velvet, with jewels flashing and dagger jingling
    against the pommel of the saddle. Thus came the Queen's Page, young
    Richard Partington, from famous London Town down into Nottinghamshire,
    upon Her Majesty's bidding, to seek Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest.

    The road was hot and dusty and his journey had been long, for that day
    he had come all the way from Leicester Town, a good twenty miles and
    more; wherefore young Partington was right glad when he saw before him a
    sweet little inn, all shady and cool beneath the trees, in front of the
    door of which a sign hung pendant, bearing the picture of a blue boar.
    Here he drew rein and called loudly for a pottle of Rhenish wine to be
    brought him, for stout country ale was too coarse a drink for this young
    gentleman. Five lusty fellows sat upon the bench beneath the pleasant
    shade of the wide-spreading oak in front of the inn door, drinking ale
    and beer, and all stared amain at this fair and gallant lad. Two of the
    stoutest of them were clothed in Lincoln green, and a great heavy oaken
    staff leaned against the gnarled oak tree trunk beside each fellow.

    The landlord came and brought a pottle of wine and a long narrow glass
    upon a salver, which he held up to the Page as he sat upon his horse.
    Young Partington poured forth the bright yellow wine and holding the
    glass aloft, cried, "Here is to the health and long happiness of my
    royal mistress, the noble Queen Eleanor; and may my journey and her
    desirings soon have end, and I find a certain stout yeoman men call
    Robin Hood."

    At these words all stared, but presently the two stout yeomen in Lincoln
    green began whispering together. Then one of the two, whom Partington
    thought to be the tallest and stoutest fellow he had ever beheld, spoke
    up and said, "What seekest thou of Robin Hood, Sir Page? And what does
    our good Queen Eleanor wish of him? I ask this of thee, not foolishly,
    but with reason, for I know somewhat of this stout yeoman."

    "An thou knowest aught of him, good fellow," said young Partington,
    "thou wilt do great service to him and great pleasure to our royal Queen
    by aiding me to find him."

    Then up spake the other yeoman, who was a handsome fellow with sunburned
    face and nut-brown, curling hair, "Thou hast an honest look, Sir Page,
    and our Queen is kind and true to all stout yeomen. Methinks I and my
    friend here might safely guide thee to Robin Hood, for we know where
    he may be found. Yet I tell thee plainly, we would not for all merry
    England have aught of harm befall him."

    "Set thy mind at ease; I bring nought of ill with me," quoth Richard
    Partington. "I bring a kind message to him from our Queen, therefore an
    ye know where he is to be found, I pray you to guide me thither."

    Then the two yeomen looked at one another again, and the tall man said,
    "Surely it were safe to do this thing, Will;" whereat the other nodded.
    Thereupon both arose, and the tall yeoman said, "We think thou art true,
    Sir Page, and meanest no harm, therefore we will guide thee to Robin
    Hood as thou dost wish."

    Then Partington paid his score, and the yeomen coming forward, they all
    straightway departed upon their way.


    Under the greenwood tree, in the cool shade that spread all around upon
    the sward, with flickering lights here and there, Robin Hood and many
    of his band lay upon the soft green grass, while Allan a Dale sang and
    played upon his sweetly sounding harp. All listened in silence, for
    young Allan's singing was one of the greatest joys in all the world
    to them; but as they so listened there came of a sudden the sound of a
    horse's feet, and presently Little John and Will Stutely came forth from
    the forest path into the open glade, young Richard Partington riding
    between them upon his milk-white horse. The three came toward where
    Robin Hood sat, all the band staring with might and main, for never had
    they seen so gay a sight as this young Page, nor one so richly clad
    in silks and velvets and gold and jewels. Then Robin arose and stepped
    forth to meet him, and Partington leaped from his horse and doffing
    his cap of crimson velvet, met Robin as he came. "Now, welcome!" cried
    Robin. "Now, welcome, fair youth, and tell me, I prythee, what bringeth
    one of so fair a presence and clad in such noble garb to our poor forest
    of Sherwood?"

    Then young Partington said, "If I err not, thou art the famous Robin
    Hood, and these thy stout band of outlawed yeomen. To thee I bring
    greetings from our noble Queen Eleanor. Oft hath she heard thee spoken
    of and thy merry doings hereabouts, and fain would she behold thy face;
    therefore she bids me tell thee that if thou wilt presently come to
    London Town, she will do all in her power to guard thee against harm,
    and will send thee back safe to Sherwood Forest again. Four days hence,
    in Finsbury Fields, our good King Henry, of great renown, holdeth a
    grand shooting match, and all the most famous archers of merry England
    will be thereat. Our Queen would fain see thee strive with these,
    knowing that if thou wilt come thou wilt, with little doubt, carry
    off the prize. Therefore she hath sent me with this greeting, and
    furthermore sends thee, as a sign of great good will, this golden ring
    from off her own fair thumb, which I give herewith into thy hands."

    Then Robin Hood bowed his head and taking the ring, kissed it right
    loyally, and then slipped it upon his little finger. Quoth he, "Sooner
    would I lose my life than this ring; and ere it departs from me, my hand
    shall be cold in death or stricken off at the wrist. Fair Sir Page, I
    will do our Queen's bidding, and will presently hie with thee to London;
    but, ere we go, I will feast thee here in the woodlands with the very
    best we have."

    "It may not be," said the Page; "we have no time to tarry, therefore
    get thyself ready straightway; and if there be any of thy band that thou
    wouldst take with thee, our Queen bids me say that she will make them
    right welcome likewise."

    "Truly, thou art right," quoth Robin, "and we have but short time to
    stay; therefore I will get me ready presently. I will choose three of my
    men, only, to go with me, and these three shall be Little John, mine
    own true right-hand man, Will Scarlet, my cousin, and Allan a Dale, my
    minstrel. Go, lads, and get ye ready straightway, and we will presently
    off with all speed that we may. Thou, Will Stutely, shall be the chief
    of the band while I am gone."

    Then Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale ran leaping, full of
    joy, to make themselves ready, while Robin also prepared himself for the
    journey. After a while they all four came forth, and a right fair sight
    they made, for Robin was clad in blue from head to foot, and Little John
    and Will Scarlet in good Lincoln green, and as for Allan a Dale, he was
    dressed in scarlet from the crown of his head to the toes of his pointed
    shoes. Each man wore beneath his cap a little head covering of burnished
    steel set with rivets of gold, and underneath his jerkin a coat of
    linked mail, as fine as carded wool, yet so tough that no arrow could
    pierce it. Then, seeing all were ready, young Partington mounted his
    horse again, and the yeomen having shaken hands all around, the five
    departed upon their way.

    That night they took up their inn in Melton Mowbray, in Leicestershire,
    and the next night they lodged at Kettering, in Northamptonshire; and
    the next at Bedford Town; and the next at St. Albans, in Hertfordshire.
    This place they left not long after the middle of the night, and
    traveling fast through the tender dawning of the summer day, when the
    dews lay shining on the meadows and faint mists hung in the dales,
    when the birds sang their sweetest and the cobwebs beneath the hedges
    glimmered like fairy cloth of silver, they came at last to the towers
    and walls of famous London Town, while the morn was still young and all
    golden toward the east.

    Queen Eleanor sat in her royal bower, through the open casements of
    which poured the sweet yellow sunshine in great floods of golden light.
    All about her stood her ladies-in-waiting chatting in low voices, while
    she herself sat dreamily where the mild air came softly drifting into
    the room laden with the fresh perfumes of the sweet red roses that
    bloomed in the great garden beneath the wall. To her came one who said
    that her page, Richard Partington, and four stout yeomen waited her
    pleasure in the court below. Then Queen Eleanor arose joyously and bade
    them be straightway shown into her presence.

    Thus Robin Hood and Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale came
    before the Queen into her own royal bower. Then Robin kneeled before the
    Queen with his hands folded upon his breast, saying in simple phrase,
    "Here am I, Robin Hood. Thou didst bid me come, and lo, I do thy
    bidding. I give myself to thee as thy true servant, and will do thy
    commanding, even if it be to the shedding of the last drop of my life's
    blood."

    But good Queen Eleanor smiled pleasantly upon him, bidding him to arise.
    Then she made them all be seated to rest themselves after their long
    journey. Rich food was brought them and noble wines, and she had her
    own pages to wait upon the wants of the yeomen. At last, after they
    had eaten all they could, she began questioning them of their merry
    adventures. Then they told her all of the lusty doings herein spoken of,
    and among others that concerning the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Richard
    of the Lea, and how the Bishop had abided three days in Sherwood Forest.
    At this, the Queen and the ladies about her laughed again and again, for
    they pictured to themselves the stout Bishop abiding in the forest and
    ranging the woods in lusty sport with Robin and his band. Then, when
    they had told all that they could bring to mind, the Queen asked Allan
    to sing to her, for his fame as a minstrel had reached even to the court
    at London Town. So straightway Allan took up his harp in his hand, and,
    without more asking, touched the strings lightly till they all rang
    sweetly, then he sang thus:

         "_Gentle river, gentle river,
         Bright thy crystal waters flow,
         Sliding where the aspens shiver,
         Gliding where the lilies blow,

         "Singing over pebbled shallows,
         Kissing blossoms bending low,
         Breaking 'neath the dipping swallows,
         Purpling where the breezes blow.

         "Floating on thy breast forever
         Down thy current I could glide;
         Grief and pain should reach me never
         On thy bright and gentle tide.

         "So my aching heart seeks thine, love,
         There to find its rest and peace,
         For, through loving, bliss is mine, love,
         And my many troubles cease_."

    Thus Allan sang, and as he sang all eyes dwelled upon him and not a
    sound broke the stillness, and even after he had done the silence hung
    for a short space. So the time passed till the hour drew nigh for the
    holding of the great archery match in Finsbury Fields.

    A gay sight were famous Finsbury Fields on that bright and sunny morning
    of lusty summertime. Along the end of the meadow stood the booths for
    the different bands of archers, for the King's yeomen were divided into
    companies of fourscore men, and each company had a captain over it; so
    on the bright greensward stood ten booths of striped canvas, a booth for
    each band of the royal archers, and at the peak of each fluttered a
    flag in the mellow air, and the flag was the color that belonged to
    the captain of each band. From the center booth hung the yellow flag of
    Tepus, the famous bow bearer of the King; next to it, on one hand,
    was the blue flag of Gilbert of the White Hand, and on the other the
    blood-red pennant of stout young Clifton of Buckinghamshire. The seven
    other archer captains were also men of great renown; among them were
    Egbert of Kent and William of Southampton; but those first named were
    most famous of all. The noise of many voices in talk and laughter came
    from within the booths, and in and out ran the attendants like
    ants about an ant-hill. Some bore ale and beer, and some bundles of
    bowstrings or sheaves of arrows. On each side of the archery range were
    rows upon rows of seats reaching high aloft, and in the center of the
    north side was a raised dais for the King and Queen, shaded by canvas
    of gay colors, and hung about with streaming silken pennants of red and
    blue and green and white. As yet the King and Queen had not come, but
    all the other benches were full of people, rising head above head high
    aloft till it made the eye dizzy to look upon them. Eightscore yards
    distant from the mark from which the archers were to shoot stood ten
    fair targets, each target marked by a flag of the color belonging to the
    band that was to shoot thereat. So all was ready for the coming of the
    King and Queen.

    At last a great blast of bugles sounded, and into the meadow came riding
    six trumpeters with silver trumpets, from which hung velvet banners
    heavy with rich workings of silver and gold thread. Behind these came
    stout King Henry upon a dapple-gray stallion, with his Queen beside him
    upon a milk-white palfrey. On either side of them walked the yeomen of
    the guard, the bright sunlight flashing from the polished blades of
    the steel halberds they carried. Behind these came the Court in a great
    crowd, so that presently all the lawn was alive with bright colors, with
    silk and velvet, with waving plumes and gleaming gold, with flashing
    jewels and sword hilts; a gallant sight on that bright summer day.

    Then all the people arose and shouted, so that their voices sounded like
    the storm upon the Cornish coast, when the dark waves run upon the shore
    and leap and break, surging amid the rocks; so, amid the roaring and the
    surging of the people, and the waving of scarfs and kerchiefs, the King
    and Queen came to their place, and, getting down from their horses,
    mounted the broad stairs that led to the raised platform, and there
    took their seats on two thrones bedecked with purple silks and cloths of
    silver and of gold.

    When all was quiet a bugle sounded, and straightway the archers came
    marching in order from their tents. Fortyscore they were in all, as
    stalwart a band of yeomen as could be found in all the wide world. So
    they came in orderly fashion and stood in front of the dais where King
    Henry and his Queen sat. King Henry looked up and down their ranks right
    proudly, for his heart warmed within him at the sight of such a gallant
    band of yeomen. Then he bade his herald Sir Hugh de Mowbray stand forth
    and proclaim the rules governing the game. So Sir Hugh stepped to the
    edge of the platform and spoke in a loud clear voice, and thus he said:

    That each man should shoot seven arrows at the target that belonged to
    his band, and, of the fourscore yeomen of each band, the three that shot
    the best should be chosen. These three should shoot three arrows apiece,
    and the one that shot the best should again be chosen. Then each of
    these should again shoot three arrows apiece, and the one that shot the
    best should have the first prize, the one that shot the next best should
    have the second, and the one that shot the next best should have the
    third prize. Each of the others should have fourscore silver pennies for
    his shooting. The first prize was to be twoscore and ten golden pounds,
    a silver bugle horn inlaid with gold, and a quiver with ten white arrows
    tipped with gold and feathered with the white swan's-wing therein. The
    second prize was to be fivescore of the fattest bucks that run on Dallen
    Lea, to be shot when the yeoman that won them chose. The third prize was
    to be two tuns of good Rhenish wine.

    So Sir Hugh spoke, and when he had done all the archers waved their bows
    aloft and shouted. Then each band turned and marched in order back to
    its place.

    And now the shooting began, the captains first taking stand and speeding
    their shafts and then making room for the men who shot, each in turn,
    after them. Two hundred and eighty score shafts were shot in all, and so
    deftly were they sped that when the shooting was done each target looked
    like the back of a hedgehog when the farm dog snuffs at it. A long
    time was taken in this shooting, and when it was over the judges came
    forward, looked carefully at the targets, and proclaimed in a loud voice
    which three had shot the best from the separate bands. Then a great
    hubbub of voices arose, each man among the crowd that looked on calling
    for his favorite archer. Then ten fresh targets were brought forward,
    and every sound was hushed as the archers took their places once more.

    This time the shooting was more speedily done, for only nine shafts
    were shot by each band. Not an arrow missed the targets, but in that of
    Gilbert of the White Hand five arrows were in the small white spot that
    marked the center; of these five three were sped by Gilbert. Then the
    judges came forward again, and looking at the targets, called aloud the
    names of the archer chosen as the best bowman of each band. Of these
    Gilbert of the White Hand led, for six of the ten arrows he had shot had
    lodged in the center; but stout Tepus and young Clifton trod close upon
    his heels; yet the others stood a fair chance for the second or third
    place.

    And now, amid the roaring of the crowd, those ten stout fellows that
    were left went back to their tents to rest for a while and change their
    bowstrings, for nought must fail at this next round, and no hand must
    tremble or eye grow dim because of weariness.

    Then while the deep buzz and hum of talking sounded all around like the
    noise of the wind in the leafy forest, Queen Eleanor turned to the King,
    and quoth she, "Thinkest thou that these yeomen so chosen are the very
    best archers in all merry England?"

    "Yea, truly," said the King, smiling, for he was well pleased with the
    sport that he had seen; "and I tell thee, that not only are they the
    best archers in all merry England, but in all the wide world beside."

    "But what wouldst thou say," quoth Queen Eleanor, "if I were to find
    three archers to match the best three yeomen of all thy guard?"

    "I would say thou hast done what I could not do," said the King,
    laughing, "for I tell thee there lives not in all the world three
    archers to match Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton of Buckinghamshire."

    "Now," said the Queen, "I know of three yeomen, and in truth I have seen
    them not long since, that I would not fear to match against any three
    that thou canst choose from among all thy fortyscore archers; and,
    moreover, I will match them here this very day. But I will only match
    them with thy archers providing that thou wilt grant a free pardon to
    all that may come in my behalf."

    At this, the King laughed loud and long. "Truly," said he, "thou art
    taking up with strange matters for a queen. If thou wilt bring those
    three fellows that thou speakest of, I will promise faithfully to give
    them free pardon for forty days, to come or to go wheresoever they
    please, nor will I harm a hair of their heads in all that time.
    Moreover, if these that thou bringest shoot better than my yeomen, man
    for man, they shall have the prizes for themselves according to their
    shooting. But as thou hast so taken up of a sudden with sports of this
    kind, hast thou a mind for a wager?"

    "Why, in sooth," said Queen Eleanor, laughing, "I know nought of such
    matters, but if thou hast a mind to do somewhat in that way, I will
    strive to pleasure thee. What wilt thou wager upon thy men?"

    Then the merry King laughed again, for he dearly loved goodly jest; so
    he said, amidst his laughter, "I will wager thee ten tuns of Rhenish
    wine, ten tuns of the stoutest ale, and tenscore bows of tempered
    Spanish yew, with quivers and arrows to match."

    All that stood around smiled at this, for it seemed a merry wager for
    a king to give to a queen; but Queen Eleanor bowed her head quietly. "I
    will take thy wager," said she, "for I know right well where to place
    those things that thou hast spoken of. Now, who will be on my side in
    this matter?" And she looked around upon them that stood about; but no
    one spake or cared to wager upon the Queen's side against such archers
    as Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton. Then the Queen spoke again, "Now, who
    will back me in this wager? Wilt thou, my Lord Bishop of Hereford?"

    "Nay," quoth the Bishop hastily, "it ill befits one of my cloth to deal
    in such matters. Moreover, there are no such archers as His Majesty's in
    all the world; therefore I would but lose my money.

    "Methinks the thought of thy gold weigheth more heavily with thee than
    the wrong to thy cloth," said the Queen, smiling, and at this a ripple
    of laughter went around, for everyone knew how fond the Bishop was of
    his money. Then the Queen turned to a knight who stood near, whose name
    was Sir Robert Lee. "Wilt thou back me in this manner?" said she. "Thou
    art surely rich enough to risk so much for the sake of a lady."

    "To pleasure my Queen I will do it," said Sir Robert Lee, "but for the
    sake of no other in all the world would I wager a groat, for no man can
    stand against Tepus and Gilbert and Clifton."

    Then turning to the King, Queen Eleanor said, "I want no such aid as Sir
    Robert giveth me; but against thy wine and beer and stout bows of yew I
    wager this girdle all set with jewels from around my waist; and surely
    that is worth more than thine."

    "Now, I take thy wager," quoth the King. "Send for thy archers
    straightway. But here come forth the others; let them shoot, and then I
    will match those that win against all the world."

    "So be it," said the Queen. Thereupon, beckoning to young Richard
    Partington, she whispered something in his ear, and straightway the Page
    bowed and left the place, crossing the meadow to the other side of the
    range, where he was presently lost in the crowd. At this, all that stood
    around whispered to one another, wondering what it all meant, and what
    three men the Queen was about to set against those famous archers of the
    King's guard.

    And now the ten archers of the King's guard took their stand again, and
    all the great crowd was hushed to the stillness of death. Slowly and
    carefully each man shot his shafts, and so deep was the silence that
    you could hear every arrow rap against the target as it struck it. Then,
    when the last shaft had sped, a great roar went up; and the shooting, I
    wot, was well worthy of the sound. Once again Gilbert had lodged three
    arrows in the white; Tepus came second with two in the white and one in
    the black ring next to it; but stout Clifton had gone down and Hubert of
    Suffolk had taken the third place, for, while both those two good yeomen
    had lodged two in the white, Clifton had lost one shot upon the fourth
    ring, and Hubert came in with one in the third.

    All the archers around Gilbert's booth shouted for joy till their
    throats were hoarse, tossing their caps aloft, and shaking hands with
    one another.

    In the midst of all the noise and hubbub five men came walking across
    the lawn toward the King's pavilion. The first was Richard Partington,
    and was known to most folk there, but the others were strange to
    everybody. Beside young Partington walked a yeoman clad in blue, and
    behind came three others, two in Lincoln green and one in scarlet. This
    last yeoman carried three stout bows of yew tree, two fancifully inlaid
    with silver and one with gold. While these five men came walking across
    the meadow, a messenger came running from the King's booth and summoned
    Gilbert and Tepus and Hubert to go with him. And now the shouting
    quickly ceased, for all saw that something unwonted was toward, so the
    folk stood up in their places and leaned forward to see what was the
    ado.

    When Partington and the others came before the spot where the King and
    Queen sat, the four yeomen bent their knees and doffed their caps unto
    her. King Henry leaned far forward and stared at them closely, but the
    Bishop of Hereford, when he saw their faces, started as though stung by
    a wasp. He opened his mouth as though about to speak, but, looking up,
    he saw the Queen gazing at him with a smile upon her lips, so he said
    nothing, but bit his nether lip, while his face was as red as a cherry.

    Then the Queen leaned forward and spake in a clear voice. "Locksley,"
    said she, "I have made a wager with the King that thou and two of thy
    men can outshoot any three that he can send against you. Wilt thou do
    thy best for my sake?"

    "Yea," quoth Robin Hood, to whom she spake, "I will do my best for thy
    sake, and, if I fail, I make my vow never to finger bowstring more."

    Now, although Little John had been somewhat abashed in the Queen's
    bower, he felt himself the sturdy fellow he was when the soles of his
    feet pressed green grass again; so he said boldly, "Now, blessings on
    thy sweet face, say I. An there lived a man that would not do his best
    for thee - I will say nought, only I would like to have the cracking of
    his knave's pate!

    "Peace, Little John!" said Robin Hood hastily, in a low voice; but good
    Queen Eleanor laughed aloud, and a ripple of merriment sounded all over
    the booth.

    The Bishop of Hereford did not laugh, neither did the King, but he
    turned to the Queen, and quoth he, "Who are these men that thou hast
    brought before us?"

    Then up spoke the Bishop hastily, for he could hold his peace no longer:
    "Your Majesty," quoth he, "yon fellow in blue is a certain outlawed
    thief of the mid-country, named Robin Hood; yon tall, strapping villain
    goeth by the name of Little John; the other fellow in green is a certain
    backsliding gentleman, known as Will Scarlet; the man in red is a rogue
    of a northern minstrel, named Allan a Dale."

    At this speech the King's brows drew together blackly, and he turned to
    the Queen. "Is this true?" said he sternly.

    "Yea," said the Queen, smiling, "the Bishop hath told the truth; and
    truly he should know them well, for he and two of his friars spent three
    days in merry sport with Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest. I did little
    think that the good Bishop would so betray his friends. But bear in mind
    that thou hast pledged thy promise for the safety of these good yeomen
    for forty days."

    "I will keep my promise," said the King, in a deep voice that showed the
    anger in his heart, "but when these forty days are gone let this outlaw
    look to himself, for mayhap things will not go so smoothly with him
    as he would like." Then he turned to his archers, who stood near the
    Sherwood yeomen, listening and wondering at all that passed. Quoth he,
    "Gilbert, and thou, Tepus, and thou, Hubert, I have pledged myself that
    ye shall shoot against these three fellows. If ye outshoot the knaves I
    will fill your caps with silver pennies; if ye fail ye shall lose
    your prizes that ye have won so fairly, and they go to them that shoot
    against you, man to man. Do your best, lads, and if ye win this bout ye
    shall be glad of it to the last days of your life. Go, now, and get you
    gone to the butts."

    Then the three archers of the King turned and went back to their booths,
    and Robin and his men went to their places at the mark from which they
    were to shoot. Then they strung their bows and made themselves ready,
    looking over their quivers of arrows, and picking out the roundest and
    the best feathered.

    But when the King's archers went to their tents, they told their friends
    all that had passed, and how that these four men were the famous Robin
    Hood and three of his band, to wit, Little John, Will Scarlet, and Allan
    a Dale. The news of this buzzed around among the archers in the
    booths, for there was not a man there that had not heard of these great
    mid-country yeomen. From the archers the news was taken up by the crowd
    that looked on at the shooting, so that at last everybody stood up,
    craning their necks to catch sight of the famous outlaws.

    Six fresh targets were now set up, one for each man that was to shoot;
    whereupon Gilbert and Tepus and Hubert came straightway forth from the
    booths. Then Robin Hood and Gilbert of the White Hand tossed a farthing
    aloft to see who should lead in the shooting, and the lot fell to
    Gilbert's side; thereupon he called upon Hubert of Suffolk to lead.

    Hubert took his place, planted his foot firmly, and fitted a fair,
    smooth arrow; then, breathing upon his fingertips, he drew the string
    slowly and carefully. The arrow sped true, and lodged in the white;
    again he shot, and again he hit the clout; a third shaft he sped, but
    this time failed of the center, and but struck the black, yet not more
    than a finger's-breadth from the white. At this a shout went up, for it
    was the best shooting that Hubert had yet done that day.

    Merry Robin laughed, and quoth he, "Thou wilt have an ill time bettering
    that round, Will, for it is thy turn next. Brace thy thews, lad, and
    bring not shame upon Sherwood."

    Then Will Scarlet took his place; but, because of overcaution, he
    spoiled his target with the very first arrow that he sped, for he hit
    the next ring to the black, the second from the center. At this Robin
    bit his lips. "Lad, lad," quoth he, "hold not the string so long! Have
    I not often told thee what Gaffer Swanthold sayeth, that 'overcaution
    spilleth the milk'?" To this Will Scarlet took heed, so the next arrow
    he shot lodged fairly in the center ring; again he shot, and again he
    smote the center; but, for all that, stout Hubert had outshot him, and
    showed the better target. Then all those that looked on clapped their
    hands for joy because that Hubert had overcome the stranger.

    Quoth the King grimly, to the Queen, "If thy archers shoot no better
    than that, thou art like to lose thy wager, lady." But Queen Eleanor
    smiled, for she looked for better things from Robin Hood and Little
    John.

    And now Tepus took his place to shoot. He, also, took overheed to what
    he was about, and so he fell into Will Scarlet's error. The first arrow
    he struck into the center ring, but the second missed its mark, and
    smote the black; the last arrow was tipped with luck, for it smote the
    very center of the clout, upon the black spot that marked it. Quoth
    Robin Hood, "That is the sweetest shot that hath been sped this day;
    but, nevertheless, friend Tepus, thy cake is burned, methinks. Little
    John, it is thy turn next."

    So Little John took his place as bidden, and shot his three arrows
    quickly. He never lowered his bow arm in all the shooting, but fitted
    each shaft with his longbow raised; yet all three of his arrows smote
    the center within easy distance of the black. At this no sound of
    shouting was heard, for, although it was the best shooting that had been
    done that day, the folk of London Town did not like to see the stout
    Tepus overcome by a fellow from the countryside, even were he as famous
    as Little John.

    And now stout Gilbert of the White Hand took his place and shot with the
    greatest care; and again, for the third time in one day, he struck all
    three shafts into the clout.

    "Well done, Gilbert!" quoth Robin Hood, smiting him upon the shoulder.
    "I make my vow, thou art one of the best archers that ever mine eyes
    beheld. Thou shouldst be a free and merry ranger like us, lad, for thou
    art better fitted for the greenwood than for the cobblestones and gray
    walls of London Town." So saying, he took his place, and drew a fair,
    round arrow from his quiver, which he turned over and over ere he fitted
    it to his bowstring.

    Then the King muttered in his beard, "Now, blessed Saint Hubert, if thou
    wilt but jog that rogue's elbow so as to make him smite even the second
    ring, I will give eightscore waxen candles three fingers'-breadth in
    thickness to thy chapel nigh Matching." But it may be Saint Hubert's
    ears were stuffed with tow, for he seemed not to hear the King's prayer
    this day.

    Having gotten three shafts to his liking, merry Robin looked carefully
    to his bowstring ere he shot. "Yea," quoth he to Gilbert, who stood
    nigh him to watch his shooting, "thou shouldst pay us a visit at merry
    Sherwood." Here he drew the bowstring to his ear. "In London" - here
    he loosed his shaft - "thou canst find nought to shoot at but rooks and
    daws; there one can tickle the ribs of the noblest stags in England." So
    he shot even while he talked, yet the shaft lodged not more than half an
    inch from the very center.

    "By my soul!" cried Gilbert. "Art thou the devil in blue, to shoot in
    that wise?"

    "Nay," quoth Robin, laughing, "not quite so ill as that, I trust." And
    he took up another shaft and fitted it to the string. Again he shot, and
    again he smote his arrow close beside the center; a third time he loosed
    his bowstring and dropped his arrow just betwixt the other two and
    into the very center, so that the feathers of all three were ruffled
    together, seeming from a distance to be one thick shaft.

    And now a low murmur ran all among that great crowd, for never before
    had London seen such shooting as this; and never again would it see it
    after Robin Hood's day had gone. All saw that the King's archers were
    fairly beaten, and stout Gilbert clapped his palm to Robin's, owning
    that he could never hope to draw such a bowstring as Robin Hood or
    Little John. But the King, full of wrath, would not have it so, though
    he knew in his mind that his men could not stand against those fellows.
    "Nay!" cried he, clenching his hands upon the arms of his seat, "Gilbert
    is not yet beaten! Did he not strike the clout thrice? Although I have
    lost my wager, he hath not yet lost the first prize. They shall shoot
    again, and still again, till either he or that knave Robin Hood cometh
    off the best. Go thou, Sir Hugh, and bid them shoot another round, and
    another, until one or the other is overcome." Then Sir Hugh, seeing how
    wroth the King was, said never a word, but went straightway to do his
    bidding; so he came to where Robin Hood and the other stood, and told
    them what the King had said.

    "With all my heart," quoth merry Robin, "I will shoot from this time
    till tomorrow day if it can pleasure my most gracious lord and King.
    Take thy place, Gilbert lad, and shoot."

    So Gilbert took his place once more, but this time he failed, for, a
    sudden little wind arising, his shaft missed the center ring, but by not
    more than the breadth of a barley straw.

    "Thy eggs are cracked, Gilbert," quoth Robin, laughing; and straightway
    he loosed a shaft, and once more smote the white circle of the center.

    Then the King arose from his place, and not a word said he, but he
    looked around with a baleful look, and it would have been an ill day for
    anyone that he saw with a joyous or a merry look upon his face. Then he
    and his Queen and all the court left the place, but the King's heart was
    brimming full of wrath.

    After the King had gone, all the yeomen of the archer guard came
    crowding around Robin, and Little John, and Will, and Allan, to snatch
    a look at these famous fellows from the mid-country; and with them came
    many that had been onlookers at the sport, for the same purpose. Thus it
    happened presently that the yeomen, to whom Gilbert stood talking, were
    all surrounded by a crowd of people that formed a ring about them.

    After a while the three judges that had the giving away of the prizes
    came forward, and the chief of them all spake to Robin and said,
    "According to agreement, the first prize belongeth rightly to thee; so
    here I give thee the silver bugle, here the quiver of ten golden arrows,
    and here a purse of twoscore and ten golden pounds." And as he spake he
    handed those things to Robin, and then turned to Little John. "To thee,"
    he said, "belongeth the second prize, to wit, fivescore of the finest
    harts that run on Dallen Lea. Thou mayest shoot them whensoever thou
    dost list." Last of all he turned to stout Hubert. "Thou," said he,
    "hast held thine own against the yeomen with whom thou didst shoot, and
    so thou hast kept the prize duly thine, to wit, two tuns of good Rhenish
    wine. These shall be delivered to thee whensoever thou dost list." Then
    he called upon the other seven of the King's archers who had last shot,
    and gave each fourscore silver pennies.

    Then up spake Robin, and quoth he, "This silver bugle I keep in honor of
    this shooting match; but thou, Gilbert, art the best archer of all the
    King's guard, and to thee I freely give this purse of gold. Take it,
    man, and would it were ten times as much, for thou art a right yeoman,
    good and true. Furthermore, to each of the ten that last shot I give one
    of these golden shafts apiece. Keep them always by you, so that ye may
    tell your grandchildren, an ye are ever blessed with them, that ye are
    the very stoutest yeomen in all the wide world."

    At this all shouted aloud, for it pleased them to hear Robin speak so of
    them.

    Then up spake Little John. "Good friend Tepus," said he, "I want not
    those harts of Dallen Lea that yon stout judge spoke of but now, for in
    truth we have enow and more than enow in our own country. Twoscore and
    ten I give to thee for thine own shooting, and five I give to each band
    for their pleasure."

    At this another great shout went up, and many tossed their caps aloft,
    and swore among themselves that no better fellows ever walked the sod
    than Robin Hood and his stout yeomen.

    While they so shouted with loud voices, a tall burly yeoman of the
    King's guard came forward and plucked Robin by the sleeve. "Good
    master," quoth he, "I have somewhat to tell thee in thine ear; a silly
    thing, God wot, for one stout yeoman to tell another; but a young
    peacock of a page, one Richard Partington, was seeking thee without
    avail in the crowd, and, not being able to find thee, told me that he
    bore a message to thee from a certain lady that thou wottest of. This
    message he bade me tell thee privily, word for word, and thus it was.
    Let me see - I trust I have forgot it not - yea, thus it was: 'The lion
    growls. Beware thy head.'"

    "Is it so?" quoth Robin, starting; for he knew right well that it was
    the Queen sent the message, and that she spake of the King's wrath.
    "Now, I thank thee, good fellow, for thou hast done me greater service
    than thou knowest of this day." Then he called his three yeomen together
    and told them privately that they had best be jogging, as it was like to
    be ill for them so nigh merry London Town. So, without tarrying longer,
    they made their way through the crowd until they had come out from the
    press. Then, without stopping, they left London Town and started away
    northward.




    The Chase of Robin Hood

    SO ROBIN HOOD and the others left the archery range at Finsbury Fields,
    and, tarrying not, set forth straightway upon their homeward journey.
    It was well for them that they did so, for they had not gone more than
    three or four miles upon their way when six of the yeomen of the King's
    guard came bustling among the crowd that still lingered, seeking for
    Robin and his men, to seize upon them and make them prisoners. Truly, it
    was an ill-done thing in the King to break his promise, but it all came
    about through the Bishop of Hereford's doing, for thus it happened:

    After the King left the archery ground, he went straightway to his
    cabinet, and with him went the Bishop of Hereford and Sir Robert Lee;
    but the King said never a word to these two, but sat gnawing his nether
    lip, for his heart was galled within him by what had happened. At last
    the Bishop of Hereford spoke, in a low, sorrowful voice: "It is a sad
    thing, Your Majesty, that this knavish outlaw should be let to escape in
    this wise; for, let him but get back to Sherwood Forest safe and sound,
    and he may snap his fingers at king and king's men."

    At these words the King raised his eyes and looked grimly upon the
    Bishop. "Sayst thou so?" quoth he. "Now, I will show thee, in good time,
    how much thou dost err, for, when the forty days are past and gone,
    I will seize upon this thieving outlaw, if I have to tear down all of
    Sherwood to find him. Thinkest thou that the laws of the King of England
    are to be so evaded by one poor knave without friends or money?"

    Then the Bishop spoke again, in his soft, smooth voice:

    "Forgive my boldness, Your Majesty, and believe that I have nought but
    the good of England and Your Majesty's desirings at heart; but what
    would it boot though my gracious lord did root up every tree of
    Sherwood? Are there not other places for Robin Hood's hiding? Cannock
    Chase is not far from Sherwood, and the great Forest of Arden is not far
    from Cannock Chase. Beside these are many other woodlands in Nottingham
    and Derby, Lincoln and York, amid any of which Your Majesty might as
    well think to seize upon Robin Hood as to lay finger upon a rat among
    the dust and broken things of a garret. Nay, my gracious lord, if he
    doth once plant foot in the woodland, he is lost to the law forever."

    At these words the King tapped his fingertips upon the table beside him
    with vexation. "What wouldst thou have me do, Bishop?" quoth he. "Didst
    thou not hear me pledge my word to the Queen? Thy talk is as barren as
    the wind from the bellows upon dead coals."

    "Far be it from me," said the cunning Bishop, "to point the way to one
    so clear-sighted as Your Majesty; but, were I the King of England, I
    should look upon the matter in this wise: I have promised my Queen, let
    us say, that for forty days the cunningest rogue in all England shall
    have freedom to come and go; but, lo! I find this outlaw in my grasp;
    shall I, then, foolishly cling to a promise so hastily given? Suppose
    that I had promised to do Her Majesty's bidding, whereupon she bade me
    to slay myself; should I, then, shut mine eyes and run blindly upon
    my sword? Thus would I argue within myself. Moreover, I would say unto
    myself, a woman knoweth nought of the great things appertaining to state
    government; and, likewise, I know a woman is ever prone to take up a
    fancy, even as she would pluck a daisy from the roadside, and then throw
    it away when the savor is gone; therefore, though she hath taken a fancy
    to this outlaw, it will soon wane away and be forgotten. As for me, I
    have the greatest villain in all England in my grasp; shall I, then,
    open my hand and let him slip betwixt my fingers? Thus, Your Majesty,
    would I say to myself, were I the King of England." So the Bishop
    talked, and the King lent his ear to his evil counsel, until, after a
    while, he turned to Sir Robert Lee and bade him send six of the yeomen
    of the guard to take Robin Hood and his three men prisoners.

    Now Sir Robert Lee was a gentle and noble knight, and he felt grieved
    to the heart to see the King so break his promise; nevertheless, he said
    nothing, for he saw how bitterly the King was set against Robin Hood;
    but he did not send the yeomen of the guard at once, but went first to
    the Queen, and told her all that had passed, and bade her send word to
    Robin of his danger. This he did not for the well-being of Robin Hood,
    but because he would save his lord's honor if he could. Thus it came
    about that when, after a while, the yeomen of the guard went to the
    archery field, they found not Robin and the others, and so got no cakes
    at that fair.

    The afternoon was already well-nigh gone when Robin Hood, Little John,
    Will, and Allan set forth upon their homeward way, trudging along
    merrily through the yellow slanting light, which speedily changed to
    rosy red as the sun sank low in the heavens. The shadows grew long,
    and finally merged into the grayness of the mellow twilight. The dusty
    highway lay all white betwixt the dark hedgerows, and along it walked
    four fellows like four shadows, the pat of their feet sounding loud, and
    their voices, as they talked, ringing clear upon the silence of the air.
    The great round moon was floating breathlessly up in the eastern sky
    when they saw before them the twinkling lights of Barnet Town, some ten
    or twelve miles from London. Down they walked through the stony streets
    and past the cosy houses with overhanging gables, before the doors of
    which sat the burghers and craftsmen in the mellow moonlight, with
    their families about them, and so came at last, on the other side of
    the hamlet, to a little inn, all shaded with roses and woodbines. Before
    this inn Robin Hood stopped, for the spot pleased him well. Quoth he,
    "Here will we take up our inn and rest for the night, for we are well
    away from London Town and our King's wrath. Moreover, if I mistake not,
    we will find sweet faring within. What say ye, lads?"

    "In sooth, good master," quoth Little John, "thy bidding and my doing
    ever fit together like cakes and ale. Let us in, I say also."

    Then up spake Will Scarlet: "I am ever ready to do what thou sayest,
    uncle, yet I could wish that we were farther upon our way ere we rest
    for the night. Nevertheless, if thou thinkest best, let us in for the
    night, say I also."

    So in they went and called for the best that the place afforded. Then a
    right good feast was set before them, with two stout bottles of old sack
    to wash it down withal. These things were served by as plump and buxom a
    lass as you could find in all the land, so that Little John, who always
    had an eye for a fair lass, even when meat and drink were by, stuck his
    arms akimbo and fixed his eyes upon her, winking sweetly whenever he saw
    her looking toward him. Then you should have seen how the lass twittered
    with laughter, and how she looked at Little John out of the corners of
    her eyes, a dimple coming in either cheek; for the fellow had always a
    taking way with the womenfolk.

    So the feast passed merrily, and never had that inn seen such lusty
    feeders as these four stout fellows; but at last they were done their
    eating, though it seemed as though they never would have ended, and
    sat loitering over the sack. As they so sat, the landlord came in of
    a sudden, and said that there was one at the door, a certain young
    esquire, Richard Partington, of the Queen's household, who wished to
    see the lad in blue, and speak with him, without loss of time. So Robin
    arose quickly, and, bidding the landlord not to follow him, left the
    others gazing at one another, and wondering what was about to happen.

    When Robin came out of the inn, he found young Richard Partington
    sitting upon his horse in the white moonlight, awaiting his coming.

    "What news bearest thou, Sir Page?" said Robin. "I trust that it is not
    of an ill nature."

    "Why," said young Partington, "for the matter of that, it is ill enow.
    The King hath been bitterly stirred up against thee by that vile Bishop
    of Hereford. He sent to arrest thee at the archery butts at Finsbury
    Fields, but not finding thee there, he hath gathered together his armed
    men, fifty-score and more, and is sending them in haste along this very
    road to Sherwood, either to take thee on the way or to prevent thy
    getting back to the woodlands again. He hath given the Bishop of
    Hereford command over all these men, and thou knowest what thou hast
    to expect of the Bishop of Hereford - short shrift and a long rope. Two
    bands of horsemen are already upon the road, not far behind me, so
    thou hadst best get thee gone from this place straightway, for, if thou
    tarriest longer, thou art like to sleep this night in a cold dungeon.
    This word the Queen hath bidden me bring to thee."

    "Now, Richard Partington," quoth Robin, "this is the second time that
    thou hast saved my life, and if the proper time ever cometh I will show
    thee that Robin Hood never forgets these things. As for that Bishop of
    Hereford, if I ever catch him nigh to Sherwood again, things will be
    like to go ill with him. Thou mayst tell the good Queen that I will
    leave this place without delay, and will let the landlord think that we
    are going to Saint Albans; but when we are upon the highroad again, I
    will go one way through the country and will send my men the other, so
    that if one falleth into the King's hands the others may haply escape.
    We will go by devious ways, and so, I hope, will reach Sherwood in
    safety. And now, Sir Page, I wish thee farewell."

    "Farewell, thou bold yeoman," said young Partington, "and mayst thou
    reach thy hiding in safety." So each shook the other's hand, and the
    lad, turning his horse's head, rode back toward London, while Robin
    entered the inn once more.

    There he found his yeomen sitting in silence, waiting his coming;
    likewise the landlord was there, for he was curious to know what Master
    Partington had to do with the fellow in blue. "Up, my merry men!" quoth
    Robin, "this is no place for us, for those are after us with whom we
    will stand but an ill chance an we fall into their hands. So we will
    go forward once more, nor will we stop this night till we reach Saint
    Albans." Hereupon, taking out his purse, he paid the landlord his score,
    and so they left the inn.

    When they had come to the highroad without the town, Robin stopped and
    told them all that had passed between young Partington and himself, and
    how that the King's men were after them with hot heels. Then he told
    them that here they should part company; they three going to the
    eastward and he to the westward, and so, skirting the main highroads,
    would come by devious paths to Sherwood. "So, be ye wily," said Robin
    Hood, "and keep well away from the northward roads till ye have gotten
    well to the eastward. And thou, Will Scarlet, take the lead of the
    others, for thou hast a cunning turn to thy wits." Then Robin kissed the
    three upon the cheeks, and they kissed him, and so they parted company.

    Not long after this, a score or more of the King's men came clattering
    up to the door of the inn at Barnet Town. Here they leaped from their
    horses and quickly surrounded the place, the leader of the band and four
    others entering the room where the yeomen had been. But they found that
    their birds had flown again, and that the King had been balked a second
    time.

    "Methought that they were naughty fellows," said the host, when he heard
    whom the men-at-arms sought. "But I heard that blue-clad knave say that
    they would go straight forward to Saint Albans; so, an ye hurry forward,
    ye may, perchance, catch them on the highroad betwixt here and there."
    For this news the leader of the band thanked mine host right heartily,
    and, calling his men together, mounted and set forth again, galloping
    forward to Saint Albans upon a wild goose chase.

    After Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale had left the highway
    near garnet, they traveled toward the eastward, without stopping, as
    long as their legs could carry them, until they came to Chelmsford,
    in Essex. Thence they turned northward, and came through Cambridge and
    Lincolnshire, to the good town of Gainsborough. Then, striking to the
    westward and the south, they came at last to the northern borders of
    Sherwood Forest, without in all that time having met so much as a single
    band of the King's men. Eight days they journeyed thus ere they reached
    the woodlands in safety, but when they got to the greenwood glade, they
    found that Robin had not yet returned.

    For Robin was not as lucky in getting back as his men had been, as you
    shall presently hear.

    After having left the great northern road, he turned his face to the
    westward, and so came past Aylesbury, to fair Woodstock, in Oxfordshire.
    Thence he turned his footsteps northward, traveling for a great distance
    by way of Warwick Town, till he came to Dudley, in Staffordshire. Seven
    days it took him to journey thus far, and then he thought he had gotten
    far enough to the north, so, turning toward the eastward, shunning the
    main roads, and choosing byways and grassy lanes, he went, by way of
    Litchfield and Ashby de la Zouch, toward Sherwood, until he came to a
    place called Stanton. And now Robin's heart began to laugh aloud, for
    he thought that his danger had gone by, and that his nostrils would soon
    snuff the spicy air of the woodlands once again. But there is many a
    slip betwixt the cup and the lip, and this Robin was to find. For thus
    it was:

    When the King's men found themselves foiled at Saint Albans, and that
    Robin and his men were not to be found high nor low, they knew not what
    to do. Presently another band of horsemen came, and another, until all
    the moonlit streets were full of armed men. Betwixt midnight and
    dawn another band came to the town, and with them came the Bishop of
    Hereford. When he heard that Robin Hood had once more slipped out of
    the trap, he stayed not a minute, but, gathering his bands together, he
    pushed forward to the northward with speed, leaving orders for all the
    troops that came to Saint Albans to follow after him without tarrying.
    On the evening of the fourth day he reached Nottingham Town, and there
    straightway divided his men into bands of six or seven, and sent them
    all through the countryside, blocking every highway and byway to the
    eastward and the southward and the westward of Sherwood. The Sheriff
    of Nottingham called forth all his men likewise, and joined with the
    Bishop, for he saw that this was the best chance that had ever befallen
    of paying back his score in full to Robin Hood. Will Scarlet and Little
    John and Allan a Dale had just missed the King's men to the eastward,
    for the very next day after they had passed the line and entered
    Sherwood the roads through which they had traveled were blocked, so
    that, had they tarried in their journeying, they would surely have
    fallen into the Bishop's hands.

    But of all this Robin knew not a whit; so he whistled merrily as he
    trudged along the road beyond Stanton, with his heart as free from care
    as the yolk of an egg is from cobwebs. At last he came to where a little
    stream spread across the road in a shallow sheet, tinkling and sparkling
    as it fretted over its bed of golden gravel. Here Robin stopped, being
    athirst, and, kneeling down, he made a cup of the palms of his hands,
    and began to drink. On either side of the road, for a long distance,
    stood tangled thickets of bushes and young trees, and it pleased Robin's
    heart to hear the little birds singing therein, for it made him think
    of Sherwood, and it seemed as though it had been a lifetime since he had
    breathed the air of the woodlands. But of a sudden, as he thus stooped,
    drinking, something hissed past his ear, and struck with a splash into
    the gravel and water beside him. Quick as a wink Robin sprang to his
    feet, and, at one bound, crossed the stream and the roadside, and
    plunged headlong into the thicket, without looking around, for he knew
    right well that that which had hissed so venomously beside his ear was
    a gray goose shaft, and that to tarry so much as a moment meant death.
    Even as he leaped into the thicket six more arrows rattled among the
    branches after him, one of which pierced his doublet, and would have
    struck deeply into his side but for the tough coat of steel that he
    wore. Then up the road came riding some of the King's men at headlong
    speed. They leaped from their horses and plunged straightway into the
    thicket after Robin. But Robin knew the ground better than they did,
    so crawling here, stooping there, and, anon, running across some little
    open, he soon left them far behind, coming out, at last, upon another
    road about eight hundred paces distant from the one he had left. Here he
    stood for a moment, listening to the distant shouts of the seven men
    as they beat up and down in the thickets like hounds that had lost the
    scent of the quarry. Then, buckling his belt more tightly around his
    waist, he ran fleetly down the road toward the eastward and Sherwood.

    But Robin had not gone more than three furlongs in that direction when
    he came suddenly to the brow of a hill, and saw beneath him another band
    of the King's men seated in the shade along the roadside in the valley
    beneath. Then he paused not a moment, but, seeing that they had not
    caught sight of him, he turned and ran back whence he had come, knowing
    that it was better to run the chance of escaping those fellows that were
    yet in the thickets than to rush into the arms of those in the valley.
    So back he ran with all speed, and had gotten safely past the thickets,
    when the seven men came forth into the open road. They raised a great
    shout when they saw him, such as the hunter gives when the deer breaks
    cover, but Robin was then a quarter of a mile and more away from them,
    coursing over the ground like a greyhound. He never slackened his pace,
    but ran along, mile after mile, till he had come nigh to Mackworth, over
    beyond the Derwent River, nigh to Derby Town. Here, seeing that he was
    out of present danger, he slackened in his running, and at last sat him
    down beneath a hedge where the grass was the longest and the shade the
    coolest, there to rest and catch his wind. "By my soul, Robin," quoth he
    to himself, "that was the narrowest miss that e'er thou hadst in all
    thy life. I do say most solemnly that the feather of that wicked shaft
    tickled mine ear as it whizzed past. This same running hath given me a
    most craving appetite for victuals and drink. Now I pray Saint Dunstan
    that he send me speedily some meat and beer."

    It seemed as though Saint Dunstan was like to answer his prayer, for
    along the road came plodding a certain cobbler, one Quince, of Derby,
    who had been to take a pair of shoes to a farmer nigh Kirk Langly, and
    was now coming back home again, with a fair boiled capon in his pouch
    and a stout pottle of beer by his side, which same the farmer had given
    him for joy of such a stout pair of shoon. Good Quince was an honest
    fellow, but his wits were somewhat of the heavy sort, like unbaked
    dough, so that the only thing that was in his mind was, "Three shillings
    sixpence ha'penny for thy shoon, good Quince - three shillings sixpence
    ha'penny for thy shoon," and this traveled round and round inside of his
    head, without another thought getting into his noddle, as a pea rolls
    round and round inside an empty quart pot.

    "Halloa, good friend," quoth Robin, from beneath the hedge, when the
    other had gotten nigh enough, "whither away so merrily this bright day?"

    Hearing himself so called upon, the Cobbler stopped, and, seeing a
    well-clad stranger in blue, he spoke to him in seemly wise. "Give ye
    good den, fair sir, and I would say that I come from Kirk Langly, where
    I ha' sold my shoon and got three shillings sixpence ha'penny for them
    in as sweet money as ever thou sawest, and honestly earned too, I would
    ha' thee know. But an I may be so bold, thou pretty fellow, what dost
    thou there beneath the hedge?"

    "Marry," quoth merry Robin, "I sit beneath the hedge here to drop salt
    on the tails of golden birds; but in sooth thou art the first chick of
    any worth I ha' seen this blessed day."

    At these words the Cobbler's eyes opened big and wide, and his mouth
    grew round with wonder, like a knothole in a board fence, "slack-a-day,"
    quoth he, "look ye, now! I ha' never seen those same golden birds. And
    dost thou in sooth find them in these hedges, good fellow? Prythee, tell
    me, are there many of them? I would fain find them mine own self."

    "Ay, truly," quoth Robin, "they are as thick here as fresh herring in
    Cannock Chase."

    "Look ye, now!" said the Cobbler, all drowned in wonder. "And dost thou
    in sooth catch them by dropping salt on their pretty tails?"

    "Yea," quoth Robin, "but this salt is of an odd kind, let me tell thee,
    for it can only be gotten by boiling down a quart of moonbeams in a
    wooden platter, and then one hath but a pinch. But tell me, now, thou
    witty man, what hast thou gotten there in that pouch by thy side and in
    that pottle?"

    At these words the Cobbler looked down at those things of which merry
    Robin spoke, for the thoughts of the golden bird had driven them from
    his mind, and it took him some time to scrape the memory of them back
    again. "Why," said he at last, "in the one is good March beer, and in
    the other is a fat capon. Truly, Quince the Cobbler will ha' a fine
    feast this day an I mistake not."

    "But tell me, good Quince," said Robin, "hast thou a mind to sell those
    things to me? For the hearing of them sounds sweet in mine ears. I will
    give thee these gay clothes of blue that I have upon my body and ten
    shillings to boot for thy clothes and thy leather apron and thy beer and
    thy capon. What sayst thou, bully boy?"

    "Nay, thou dost jest with me," said the Cobbler, "for my clothes are
    coarse and patched, and thine are of fine stuff and very pretty."

    "Never a jest do I speak," quoth Robin. "Come, strip thy jacket off and
    I will show thee, for I tell thee I like thy clothes well. Moreover, I
    will be kind to thee, for I will feast straightway upon the good things
    thou hast with thee, and thou shalt be bidden to the eating." At these
    words he began slipping off his doublet, and the Cobbler, seeing him so
    in earnest, began pulling off his clothes also, for Robin Hood's garb
    tickled his eye. So each put on the other fellow's clothes, and Robin
    gave the honest Cobbler ten bright new shillings. Quoth merry Robin,
    "I ha' been a many things in my life before, but never have I been an
    honest cobbler. Come, friend, let us fall to and eat, for something
    within me cackles aloud for that good fat capon." So both sat down and
    began to feast right lustily, so that when they were done the bones of
    the capon were picked as bare as charity.

    Then Robin stretched his legs out with a sweet feeling of comfort within
    him. Quoth he, "By the turn of thy voice, good Quince, I know that
    thou hast a fair song or two running loose in thy head like colts in a
    meadow. I prythee, turn one of them out for me."

    "A song or two I ha'," quoth the Cobbler, "poor things, poor things, but
    such as they are thou art welcome to one of them." So, moistening his
    throat with a swallow of beer, he sang:

         "_Of all the joys, the best I love,
         Sing hey my frisking Nan, O,
         And that which most my soul doth move,
         It is the clinking can, O.

         "All other bliss I'd throw away,
         Sing hey my frisking Nan, O,
         But this_ - "

    The stout Cobbler got no further in his song, for of a sudden six
    horsemen burst upon them where they sat, and seized roughly upon the
    honest craftsman, hauling him to his feet, and nearly plucking the
    clothes from him as they did so. "Ha!" roared the leader of the band
    in a great big voice of joy, "have we then caught thee at last, thou
    blue-clad knave? Now, blessed be the name of Saint Hubert, for we are
    fourscore pounds richer this minute than we were before, for the good
    Bishop of Hereford hath promised that much to the band that shall bring
    thee to him. Oho! thou cunning rascal! thou wouldst look so innocent,
    forsooth! We know thee, thou old fox. But off thou goest with us to have
    thy brush clipped forthwith." At these words the poor Cobbler gazed all
    around him with his great blue eyes as round as those of a dead fish,
    while his mouth gaped as though he had swallowed all his words and so
    lost his speech.

    Robin also gaped and stared in a wondering way, just as the Cobbler
    would have done in his place. "Alack-a-daisy, me," quoth he. "I know
    not whether I be sitting here or in No-man's-land! What meaneth all this
    stir i' th' pot, dear good gentlemen? Surely this is a sweet, honest
    fellow."

    "'Honest fellow,' sayst thou, clown?" quoth one of the men "Why, I tell
    thee that this is that same rogue that men call Robin Hood."

    At this speech the Cobbler stared and gaped more than ever, for there
    was such a threshing of thoughts going on within his poor head that his
    wits were all befogged with the dust and chaff thereof. Moreover, as
    he looked at Robin Hood, and saw the yeoman look so like what he knew
    himself to be, he began to doubt and to think that mayhap he was the
    great outlaw in real sooth. Said he in a slow, wondering voice, "Am I
    in very truth that fellow? - Now I had thought - but nay, Quince, thou art
    mistook - yet - am I? - Nay, I must indeed be Robin Hood! Yet, truly, I had
    never thought to pass from an honest craftsman to such a great yeoman."

    "Alas!" quoth Robin Hood, "look ye there, now! See how your
    ill-treatment hath curdled the wits of this poor lad and turned them all
    sour! I, myself, am Quince, the Cobbler of Derby Town."

    "Is it so?" said Quince. "Then, indeed, I am somebody else, and can be
    none other than Robin Hood. Take me, fellows; but let me tell you that
    ye ha' laid hand upon the stoutest yeoman that ever trod the woodlands."

    "Thou wilt play madman, wilt thou?" said the leader of the band. "Here,
    Giles, fetch a cord and bind this knave's hands behind him. I warrant
    we will bring his wits back to him again when we get him safe before our
    good Bishop at Tutbury Town." Thereupon they tied the Cobbler's hands
    behind him, and led him off with a rope, as the farmer leads off the
    calf he hath brought from the fair. Robin stood looking after them, and
    when they were gone he laughed till the tears rolled down his cheeks;
    for he knew that no harm would befall the honest fellow, and he pictured
    to himself the Bishop's face when good Quince was brought before him
    as Robin Hood. Then, turning his steps once more to the eastward, he
    stepped out right foot foremost toward Nottinghamshire and Sherwood
    Forest.

    But Robin Hood had gone through more than he wotted of. His journey
    from London had been hard and long, and in a se'ennight he had traveled
    sevenscore and more of miles. He thought now to travel on without
    stopping until he had come to Sherwood, but ere he had gone a half a
    score of miles he felt his strength giving way beneath him like a river
    bank which the waters have undermined. He sat him down and rested, but
    he knew within himself that he could go no farther that day, for his
    feet felt like lumps of lead, so heavy were they with weariness. Once
    more he arose and went forward, but after traveling a couple of miles
    he was fain to give the matter up, so, coming to an inn just then, he
    entered and calling the landlord, bade him show him to a room, although
    the sun was only then just sinking in the western sky. There were but
    three bedrooms in the place, and to the meanest of these the landlord
    showed Robin Hood, but little Robin cared for the looks of the place,
    for he could have slept that night upon a bed of broken stones. So,
    stripping off his clothes without more ado, he rolled into the bed and
    was asleep almost ere his head touched the pillow.

    Not long after Robin had so gone to his rest a great cloud peeped
    blackly over the hills to the westward. Higher and higher it arose
    until it piled up into the night like a mountain of darkness. All around
    beneath it came ever and anon a dull red flash, and presently a short
    grim mutter of the coming thunder was heard. Then up rode four stout
    burghers of Nottingham Town, for this was the only inn within
    five miles' distance, and they did not care to be caught in such a
    thunderstorm as this that was coming upon them. Leaving their nags to
    the stableman, they entered the best room of the inn, where fresh green
    rushes lay all spread upon the floor, and there called for the goodliest
    fare that the place afforded. After having eaten heartily they bade the
    landlord show them to their rooms, for they were aweary, having ridden
    all the way from Dronfield that day. So off they went, grumbling at
    having to sleep two in a bed, but their troubles on this score, as well
    as all others, were soon lost in the quietness of sleep.

    And now came the first gust of wind, rushing past the place, clapping
    and banging the doors and shutters, smelling of the coming rain, and all
    wrapped in a cloud of dust and leaves. As though the wind had brought a
    guest along with it, the door opened of a sudden and in came a friar of
    Emmet Priory, and one in high degree, as was shown by the softness and
    sleekness of his robes and the richness of his rosary. He called to the
    landlord, and bade him first have his mule well fed and bedded in the
    stable, and then to bring him the very best there was in the house.
    So presently a savory stew of tripe and onions, with sweet little fat
    dumplings, was set before him, likewise a good stout pottle of
    Malmsey, and straightway the holy friar fell to with great courage and
    heartiness, so that in a short time nought was left but a little pool of
    gravy in the center of the platter, not large enow to keep the life in a
    starving mouse.

    In the meantime the storm broke. Another gust of wind went rushing
    by, and with it fell a few heavy drops of rain, which presently came
    rattling down in showers, beating against the casements like a hundred
    little hands. Bright flashes of lightning lit up every raindrop, and
    with them came cracks of thunder that went away rumbling and bumping as
    though Saint Swithin were busy rolling great casks of water across rough
    ground overhead. The womenfolks screamed, and the merry wags in
    the taproom put their arms around their waists to soothe them into
    quietness.

    At last the holy friar bade the landlord show him to his room; but when
    he heard that he was to bed with a cobbler, he was as ill contented a
    fellow as you could find in all England, nevertheless there was nothing
    for it, and he must sleep there or nowhere; so, taking up his candle,
    he went off, grumbling like the now distant thunder. When he came to the
    room where he was to sleep he held the light over Robin and looked at
    him from top to toe; then he felt better pleased, for, instead, of a
    rough, dirty-bearded fellow, he beheld as fresh and clean a lad as one
    could find in a week of Sundays; so, slipping off his clothes, he also
    huddled into the bed, where Robin, grunting and grumbling in his sleep,
    made room for him. Robin was more sound asleep, I wot, than he had been
    for many a day, else he would never have rested so quietly with one of
    the friar's sort so close beside him. As for the friar, had he known who
    Robin Hood was, you may well believe he would almost as soon have slept
    with an adder as with the man he had for a bedfellow.

    So the night passed comfortably enough, but at the first dawn of day
    Robin opened his eyes and turned his head upon the pillow. Then how he
    gaped and how he stared, for there beside him lay one all shaven and
    shorn, so that he knew that it must be a fellow in holy orders. He
    pinched himself sharply, but, finding he was awake, sat up in bed, while
    the other slumbered as peacefully as though he were safe and sound at
    home in Emmet Priory. "Now," quoth Robin to himself, "I wonder how this
    thing hath dropped into my bed during the night." So saying, he arose
    softly, so as not to waken the other, and looking about the room he
    espied the friar's clothes lying upon a bench near the wall. First he
    looked at the clothes, with his head on one side, and then he looked
    at the friar and slowly winked one eye. Quoth he, "Good Brother
    What-e'er-thy-name-may-be, as thou hast borrowed my bed so freely I'll
    e'en borrow thy clothes in return." So saying, he straightway donned the
    holy man's garb, but kindly left the cobbler's clothes in the place
    of it. Then he went forth into the freshness of the morning, and the
    stableman that was up and about the stables opened his eyes as though he
    saw a green mouse before him, for such men as the friars of Emmet were
    not wont to be early risers; but the man bottled his thoughts, and only
    asked Robin whether he wanted his mule brought from the stable.

    "Yea, my son," quoth Robin - albeit he knew nought of the mule - "and
    bring it forth quickly, I prythee, for I am late and must be jogging."
    So presently the stableman brought forth the mule, and Robin mounted it
    and went on his way rejoicing.

    As for the holy friar, when he arose he was in as pretty a stew as any
    man in all the world, for his rich, soft robes were gone, likewise his
    purse with ten golden pounds in it, and nought was left but patched
    clothes and a leathern apron. He raged and swore like any layman, but as
    his swearing mended nothing and the landlord could not aid him, and as,
    moreover, he was forced to be at Emmet Priory that very morning upon
    matters of business, he was fain either to don the cobbler's clothes
    or travel the road in nakedness. So he put on the clothes, and, still
    raging and swearing vengeance against all the cobblers in Derbyshire,
    he set forth upon his way afoot; but his ills had not yet done with him,
    for he had not gone far ere he fell into the hands of the King's men,
    who marched him off, willy-nilly, to Tutbury Town and the Bishop of
    Hereford. In vain he swore he was a holy man, and showed his shaven
    crown; off he must go, for nothing would do but that he was Robin Hood.

    Meanwhile merry Robin rode along contentedly, passing safely by two
    bands of the King's men, until his heart began to dance within him
    because of the nearness of Sherwood; so he traveled ever on to the
    eastward, till, of a sudden, he met a noble knight in a shady lane. Then
    Robin checked his mule quickly and leaped from off its back. "Now, well
    met, Sir Richard of the Lea," cried he, "for rather than any other man
    in England would I see thy good face this day!" Then he told Sir Richard
    all the happenings that had befallen him, and that now at last he felt
    himself safe, being so nigh to Sherwood again. But when Robin had done,
    Sir Richard shook his head sadly. "Thou art in greater danger now,
    Robin, than thou hast yet been," said he, "for before thee lie bands of
    the Sheriff's men blocking every road and letting none pass through the
    lines without examining them closely. I myself know this, having passed
    them but now. Before thee lie the Sheriffs men and behind thee the
    King's men, and thou canst not hope to pass either way, for by this
    time they will know of thy disguise and will be in waiting to seize upon
    thee. My castle and everything within it are thine, but nought could be
    gained there, for I could not hope to hold it against such a force as is
    now in Nottingham of the King's and the Sheriffs men." Having so spoken,
    Sir Richard bent his head in thought, and Robin felt his heart sink
    within him like that of the fox that hears the hounds at his heels and
    finds his den blocked with earth so that there is no hiding for him.
    But presently Sir Richard spoke again, saying, "One thing thou canst do,
    Robin, and one only. Go back to London and throw thyself upon the mercy
    of our good Queen Eleanor. Come with me straightway to my castle. Doff
    these clothes and put on such as my retainers wear. Then I will hie me
    to London Town with a troop of men behind me, and thou shalt mingle with
    them, and thus will I bring thee to where thou mayst see and speak with
    the Queen. Thy only hope is to get to Sherwood, for there none can reach
    thee, and thou wilt never get to Sherwood but in this way."

    So Robin went with Sir Richard of the Lea, and did as he said, for he
    saw the wisdom of that which the knight advised, and that this was his
    only chance of safety.


    Queen Eleanor walked in her royal garden, amid the roses that bloomed
    sweetly, and with her walked six of her ladies-in-waiting, chattering
    blithely together. Of a sudden a man leaped up to the top of the wall
    from the other side, and then, hanging for a moment, dropped lightly
    upon the grass within. All the ladies-in-waiting shrieked at the
    suddenness of his coming, but the man ran to the Queen and kneeled at
    her feet, and she saw that it was Robin Hood.

    "Why, how now, Robin!" cried she, "dost thou dare to come into the very
    jaws of the raging lion? Alas, poor fellow! Thou art lost indeed if the
    King finds thee here. Dost thou not know that he is seeking thee through
    all the land?"

    "Yea," quoth Robin, "I do know right well that the King seeks me, and
    therefore I have come; for, surely, no ill can befall me when he hath
    pledged his royal word to Your Majesty for my safety. Moreover, I know
    Your Majesty's kindness and gentleness of heart, and so I lay my life
    freely in your gracious hands."

    "I take thy meaning, Robin Hood," said the Queen, "and that thou dost
    convey reproach to me, as well thou mayst, for I know that I have not
    done by thee as I ought to have done. I know right well that thou must
    have been hard pressed by peril to leap so boldly into one danger to
    escape another. Once more I promise thee mine aid, and will do all I can
    to send thee back in safety to Sherwood Forest. Bide thou here till I
    return." So saying, she left Robin in the garden of roses, and was gone
    a long time.

    When she came back Sir Robert Lee was with her, and the Queen's cheeks
    were hot and the Queen's eyes were bright, as though she had been
    talking with high words. Then Sir Robert came straight forward to where
    Robin Hood stood, and he spoke to the yeoman in a cold, stern voice.
    Quoth he, "Our gracious Sovereign the King hath mitigated his wrath
    toward thee, fellow, and hath once more promised that thou shalt depart
    in peace and safety. Not only hath he promised this, but in three days
    he will send one of his pages to go with thee and see that none arrest
    thy journey back again. Thou mayst thank thy patron saint that thou hast
    such a good friend in our noble Queen, for, but for her persuasion and
    arguments, thou hadst been a dead man, I can tell thee. Let this peril
    that thou hast passed through teach thee two lessons. First, be more
    honest. Second, be not so bold in thy comings and goings. A man that
    walketh in the darkness as thou dost may escape for a time, but in the
    end he will surely fall into the pit. Thou hast put thy head in the
    angry lion's mouth, and yet thou hast escaped by a miracle. Try it not
    again." So saying, he turned and left Robin and was gone.

    For three days Robin abided in London in the Queen's household, and at
    the end of that time the King's head Page, Edward Cunningham, came, and
    taking Robin with him, departed northward upon his way to Sherwood.
    Now and then they passed bands of the King's men coming back again to
    London, but none of those bands stopped them, and so, at last, they
    reached the sweet, leafy woodlands.




    Robin Hood and Guy of Gisbourne

    A LONG TIME passed after the great shooting match, and during that time
    Robin followed one part of the advice of Sir Robert Lee, to wit, that of
    being less bold in his comings and his goings; for though mayhap he may
    not have been more honest (as most folks regard honesty), he took good
    care not to travel so far from Sherwood that he could not reach it both
    easily and quickly.

    Great changes had fallen in this time; for King Henry had died and King
    Richard had come to the crown that fitted him so well through many hard
    trials, and through adventures as stirring as any that ever befell Robin
    Hood. But though great changes came, they did not reach to Sherwood's
    shades, for there Robin Hood and his men dwelled as merrily as they had
    ever done, with hunting and feasting and singing and blithe woodland
    sports; for it was little the outside striving of the world troubled
    them.

    The dawning of a summer's day was fresh and bright, and the birds sang
    sweetly in a great tumult of sound. So loud was their singing that
    it awakened Robin Hood where he lay sleeping, so that he stirred, and
    turned, and arose. Up rose Little John also, and all the merry men;
    then, after they had broken their fast, they set forth hither and
    thither upon the doings of the day.

    Robin Hood and Little John walked down a forest path where all around
    the leaves danced and twinkled as the breeze trembled through them and
    the sunlight came flickering down. Quoth Robin Hood, "I make my vow,
    Little John, my blood tickles my veins as it flows through them this gay
    morn. What sayst thou to our seeking adventures, each one upon his own
    account?"

    "With all my heart," said Little John. "We have had more than one
    pleasant doing in that way, good master. Here are two paths; take thou
    the one to the right hand, and I will take the one to the left, and then
    let us each walk straight ahead till he tumble into some merry doing or
    other."

    "I like thy plan," quoth Robin, "therefore we will part here. But look
    thee, Little John, keep thyself out of mischief, for I would not have
    ill befall thee for all the world."

    "Marry, come up," quoth Little John, "how thou talkest! Methinks thou
    art wont to get thyself into tighter coils than I am like to do."

    At this Robin Hood laughed. "Why, in sooth, Little John," said he, "thou
    hast a blundering hard-headed way that seemeth to bring thee right side
    uppermost in all thy troubles; but let us see who cometh out best this
    day." So saying, he clapped his palm to Little John's and each departed
    upon his way, the trees quickly shutting the one from the other's sight.

    Robin Hood strolled onward till he came to where a broad woodland road
    stretched before him. Overhead the branches of the trees laced together
    in flickering foliage, all golden where it grew thin to the sunlight;
    beneath his feet the ground was soft and moist from the sheltering
    shade. Here in this pleasant spot the sharpest adventure that ever
    befell Robin Hood came upon him; for, as he walked down the woodland
    path thinking of nought but the songs of the birds, he came of a sudden
    to where a man was seated upon the mossy roots beneath the shade of
    a broad-spreading oak tree. Robin Hood saw that the stranger had not
    caught sight of him, so he stopped and stood quite still, looking at the
    other a long time before he came forward. And the stranger, I wot,
    was well worth looking at, for never had Robin seen a figure like that
    sitting beneath the tree. From his head to his feet he was clad in a
    horse's hide, dressed with the hair upon it. Upon his head was a cowl
    that hid his face from sight, and which was made of the horse's skin,
    the ears whereof stuck up like those of a rabbit. His body was clad in
    a jacket made of the hide, and his legs were covered with the hairy skin
    likewise. By his side was a heavy broadsword and a sharp, double-edged
    dagger. A quiver of smooth round arrows hung across his shoulders, and
    his stout bow of yew leaned against the tree beside him.

    "Halloa, friend," cried Robin, coming forward at last, "who art thou
    that sittest there? And what is that that thou hast upon thy body? I
    make my vow I ha' never seen such a sight in all my life before. Had I
    done an evil thing, or did my conscience trouble me, I would be afraid
    of thee, thinking that thou wast someone from down below bringing a
    message bidding me come straightway to King Nicholas."

    To this speech the other answered not a word, but he pushed the cowl
    back from his head and showed a knit brow, a hooked nose, and a pair of
    fierce, restless black eyes, which altogether made Robin think of a hawk
    as he looked on his face. But beside this there was something about the
    lines on the stranger's face, and his thin cruel mouth, and the hard
    glare of his eyes, that made one's flesh creep to look upon.

    "Who art thou, rascal?" said he at last, in a loud, harsh voice.

    "Tut, tut," quoth merry Robin, "speak not so sourly, brother. Hast
    thou fed upon vinegar and nettles this morning that thy speech is so
    stinging?"

    "An thou likest not my words," said the other fiercely, "thou hadst best
    be jogging, for I tell thee plainly, my deeds match them."

    "Nay, but I do like thy words, thou sweet, pretty thing," quoth Robin,
    squatting down upon the grass in front of the other. "Moreover, I tell
    thee thy speech is witty and gamesome as any I ever heard in all my
    life."

    The other said not a word, but he glared upon Robin with a wicked and
    baleful look, such as a fierce dog bestows upon a man ere it springs at
    his throat. Robin returned the gaze with one of wide-eyed innocence, not
    a shadow of a smile twinkling in his eyes or twitching at the corners of
    his mouth. So they sat staring at one another for a long time, until the
    stranger broke the silence suddenly. "What is thy name, fellow?" said
    he.

    "Now," quoth Robin, "I am right glad to hear thee speak, for I began to
    fear the sight of me had stricken thee dumb. As for my name, it may be
    this or it may be that; but methinks it is more meet for thee to tell
    me thine, seeing that thou art the greater stranger in these parts.
    Prythee, tell me, sweet chuck, why wearest thou that dainty garb upon
    thy pretty body?" At these words the other broke into a short, harsh
    roar of laughter. "By the bones of the Daemon Odin," said he, "thou art
    the boldest-spoken man that ever I have seen in all my life. I know not
    why I do not smite thee down where thou sittest, for only two days ago I
    skewered a man over back of Nottingham Town for saying not half so much
    to me as thou hast done. I wear this garb, thou fool, to keep my body
    warm; likewise it is near as good as a coat of steel against a common
    sword-thrust. As for my name, I care not who knoweth it. It is Guy
    of Gisbourne, and thou mayst have heard it before. I come from the
    woodlands over in Herefordshire, upon the lands of the Bishop of that
    ilk. I am an outlaw, and get my living by hook and by crook in a manner
    it boots not now to tell of. Not long since the Bishop sent for me, and
    said that if I would do a certain thing that the Sheriff of Nottingham
    would ask of me, he would get me a free pardon, and give me tenscore
    pounds to boot. So straightway I came to Nottingham Town and found my
    sweet Sheriff; and what thinkest thou he wanted of me? Why, forsooth, to
    come here to Sherwood to hunt up one Robin Hood, also an outlaw, and to
    take him alive or dead. It seemeth that they have no one here to face
    that bold fellow, and so sent all the way to Herefordshire, and to me,
    for thou knowest the old saying, 'Set a thief to catch a thief.' As for
    the slaying of this fellow, it galleth me not a whit, for I would shed
    the blood of my own brother for the half of two hundred pounds."

    To all this Robin listened, and as he listened his gorge rose. Well he
    knew of this Guy of Gisbourne, and of all the bloody and murderous deeds
    that he had done in Herefordshire, for his doings were famous throughout
    all the land. Yet, although he loathed the very presence of the man, he
    held his peace, for he had an end to serve. "Truly," quoth he, "I have
    heard of thy gentle doings. Methinks there is no one in all the world
    that Robin Hood would rather meet than thee."

    At this Guy of Gisbourne gave another harsh laugh. "Why," quoth he, "it
    is a merry thing to think of one stout outlaw like Robin Hood meeting
    another stout outlaw like Guy of Gisbourne. Only in this case it will be
    an ill happening for Robin Hood, for the day he meets Guy of Gisbourne
    he shall die."

    "But thou gentle, merry spirit," quoth Robin, "dost thou not think that
    mayhap this same Robin Hood may be the better man of the two? I know
    him right well, and many think that he is one of the stoutest men
    hereabouts."

    "He may be the stoutest of men hereabouts," quoth Guy of Gisbourne,
    "yet, I tell thee, fellow, this sty of yours is not the wide world.
    I lay my life upon it I am the better man of the two. He an outlaw,
    forsooth! Why, I hear that he hath never let blood in all his life,
    saving when he first came to the forest. Some call him a great archer;
    marry, I would not be afraid to stand against him all the days of the
    year with a bow in my hand."

    "Why, truly, some folk do call him a great archer," said Robin Hood,
    "but we of Nottinghamshire are famous hands with the longbow. Even I,
    though but a simple hand at the craft, would not fear to try a bout with
    thee."

    At these words Guy of Gisbourne looked upon Robin with wondering eyes,
    and then gave another roar of laughter till the woods rang. "Now," quoth
    he, "thou art a bold fellow to talk to me in this way. I like thy spirit
    in so speaking up to me, for few men have dared to do so. Put up a
    garland, lad, and I will try a bout with thee."

    "Tut, tut," quoth Robin, "only babes shoot at garlands hereabouts. I
    will put up a good Nottingham mark for thee." So saying, he arose, and
    going to a hazel thicket not far off, he cut a wand about twice
    the thickness of a man's thumb. From this he peeled the bark, and,
    sharpening the point, stuck it up in the ground in front of a great oak
    tree. Thence he measured off fourscore paces, which brought him beside
    the tree where the other sat. "There," quoth he, "is the kind of mark
    that Nottingham yeomen shoot at. Now let me see thee split that wand if
    thou art an archer."

    Then Guy of Gisbourne arose. "Now out upon it!" cried he. "The Devil
    himself could not hit such a mark as that."

    "Mayhap he could and mayhap he could not," quoth merry Robin, "but that
    we shall never know till thou hast shot thereat."

    At these words Guy of Gisbourne looked upon Robin with knit brows, but,
    as the yeoman still looked innocent of any ill meaning, he bottled his
    words and strung his bow in silence. Twice he shot, but neither time did
    he hit the wand, missing it the first time by a span and the second time
    by a good palm's-breadth. Robin laughed and laughed. "I see now," quoth
    he, "that the Devil himself could not hit that mark. Good fellow, if
    thou art no better with the broadsword than thou art with the bow and
    arrow, thou wilt never overcome Robin Hood."

    At these words Guy of Gisbourne glared savagely upon Robin. Quoth he,
    "Thou hast a merry tongue, thou villain; but take care that thou makest
    not too free with it, or I may cut it out from thy throat for thee."

    Robin Hood strung his bow and took his place with never a word, albeit
    his heartstrings quivered with anger and loathing. Twice he shot, the
    first time hitting within an inch of the wand, the second time splitting
    it fairly in the middle. Then, without giving the other a chance for
    speech, he flung his bow upon the ground. "There, thou bloody villain!"
    cried he fiercely, "let that show thee how little thou knowest of manly
    sports. And now look thy last upon the daylight, for the good earth hath
    been befouled long enough by thee, thou vile beast! This day, Our Lady
    willing, thou diest - I am Robin Hood." So saying, he flashed forth his
    bright sword in the sunlight.

    For a time Guy of Gisbourne stared upon Robin as though bereft of wits;
    but his wonder quickly passed to a wild rage. "Art thou indeed Robin
    Hood?" cried he. "Now I am glad to meet thee, thou poor wretch! Shrive
    thyself, for thou wilt have no time for shriving when I am done with
    thee." So saying, he also drew his sword.

    And now came the fiercest fight that ever Sherwood saw; for each man
    knew that either he or the other must die, and that no mercy was to be
    had in this battle. Up and down they fought, till all the sweet green
    grass was crushed and ground beneath the trampling of their heels. More
    than once the point of Robin Hood's sword felt the softness of flesh,
    and presently the ground began to be sprinkled with bright red drops,
    albeit not one of them came from Robin's veins. At last Guy of Gisbourne
    made a fierce and deadly thrust at Robin Hood, from which he leaped back
    lightly, but in so leaping he caught his heel in a root and fell heavily
    upon his back. "Now, Holy Mary aid me!" muttered he, as the other leaped
    at him, with a grin of rage upon his face. Fiercely Guy of Gisbourne
    stabbed at the other with his great sword, but Robin caught the blade in
    his naked hand, and, though it cut his palm, he turned the point away so
    that it plunged deep into the ground close beside him; then, ere a blow
    could be struck again, he leaped to his feet, with his good sword in
    his hand. And now despair fell upon Guy of Gisbourne's heart in a black
    cloud, and he looked around him wildly, like a wounded hawk. Seeing that
    his strength was going from him, Robin leaped forward, and, quick as a
    flash, struck a back-handed blow beneath the sword arm. Down fell
    the sword from Guy of Gisbourne's grasp, and back he staggered at the
    stroke, and, ere he could regain himself, Robin's sword passed through
    and through his body. Round he spun upon his heel, and, flinging his
    hands aloft with a shrill, wild cry, fell prone upon his face upon the
    green sod.

    Then Robin Hood wiped his sword and thrust it back into the scabbard,
    and, coming to where Guy of Gisbourne lay, he stood over him with folded
    arms, talking to himself the while. "This is the first man I have slain
    since I shot the Kings forester in the hot days of my youth. I ofttimes
    think bitterly, even yet, of that first life I took, but of this I am as
    glad as though I had slain a wild boar that laid waste a fair country.
    Since the Sheriff of Nottingham hath sent such a one as this against me,
    I will put on the fellow's garb and go forth to see whether I may not
    find his worship, and perchance pay him back some of the debt I owe him
    upon this score."

    So saying, Robin Hood stripped the hairy garments from off the dead man,
    and put them on himself, all bloody as they were. Then, strapping the
    other's sword and dagger around his body and carrying his own in his
    hand, together with the two bows of yew, he drew the cowl of horse's
    hide over his face, so that none could tell who he was, and set forth
    from the forest, turning his steps toward the eastward and Nottingham
    Town. As he strode along the country roads, men, women, and children
    hid away from him, for the terror of Guy of Gisbourne's name and of his
    doings had spread far and near.

    And now let us see what befell Little John while these things were
    happening.

    Little John walked on his way through the forest paths until he had
    come to the outskirts of the woodlands, where, here and there, fields of
    barley, corn, or green meadow lands lay smiling in the sun. So he came
    to the highroad and to where a little thatched cottage stood back of
    a cluster of twisted crab trees, with flowers in front of it. Here he
    stopped of a sudden, for he thought that he heard the sound of someone
    in sorrow. He listened, and found that it came from the cottage; so,
    turning his footsteps thither, he pushed open the wicket and entered
    the place. There he saw a gray-haired dame sitting beside a cold
    hearthstone, rocking herself to and fro and weeping bitterly.

    Now Little John had a tender heart for the sorrows of other folk, so,
    coming to the old woman and patting her kindly upon the shoulder, he
    spoke comforting words to her, bidding her cheer up and tell him her
    troubles, for that mayhap he might do something to ease them. At all
    this the good dame shook her head; but all the same his kind words did
    soothe her somewhat, so after a while she told him all that bore upon
    her mind. That that morning she had three as fair, tall sons beside her
    as one could find in all Nottinghamshire, but that they were now taken
    from her, and were like to be hanged straightway; that, want having
    come upon them, her eldest boy had gone out, the night before, into the
    forest, and had slain a hind in the moonlight; that the King's rangers
    had followed the blood upon the grass until they had come to her
    cottage, and had there found the deer's meat in the cupboard; that, as
    neither of the younger sons would betray their brother, the foresters
    had taken all three away, in spite of the oldest saying that he alone
    had slain the deer; that, as they went, she had heard the rangers
    talking among themselves, saying that the Sheriff had sworn that he
    would put a check upon the great slaughter of deer that had been going
    on of late by hanging the very first rogue caught thereat upon the
    nearest tree, and that they would take the three youths to the King's
    Head Inn, near Nottingham Town, where the Sheriff was abiding that day,
    there to await the return of a certain fellow he had sent into Sherwood
    to seek for Robin Hood.

    To all this Little John listened, shaking his head sadly now and then.
    "Alas," quoth he, when the good dame had finished her speech, "this is
    indeed an ill case. But who is this that goeth into Sherwood after Robin
    Hood, and why doth he go to seek him? But no matter for that now; only
    that I would that Robin Hood were here to advise us. Nevertheless, no
    time may be lost in sending for him at this hour, if we would save the
    lives of thy three sons. Tell me, hast thou any clothes hereabouts that
    I may put on in place of these of Lincoln green? Marry, if our stout
    Sheriff catcheth me without disguise, I am like to be run up more
    quickly than thy sons, let me tell thee, dame."

    Then the old woman told him that she had in the house some of the
    clothes of her good husband, who had died only two years before. These
    she brought to Little John, who, doffing his garb of Lincoln green, put
    them on in its stead. Then, making a wig and false beard of uncarded
    wool, he covered his own brown hair and beard, and, putting on a great,
    tall hat that had belonged to the old peasant, he took his staff in one
    hand and his bow in the other, and set forth with all speed to where the
    Sheriff had taken up his inn.

    A mile or more from Nottingham Town, and not far from the southern
    borders of Sherwood Forest, stood the cosy inn bearing the sign of the
    King's Head. Here was a great bustle and stir on this bright morning,
    for the Sheriff and a score of his men had come to stop there and
    await Guy of Gisbourne's return from the forest. Great hiss and fuss of
    cooking was going on in the kitchen, and great rapping and tapping of
    wine kegs and beer barrels was going on in the cellar. The Sheriff
    sat within, feasting merrily of the best the place afforded, and the
    Sheriff's men sat upon the bench before the door, quaffing ale, or lay
    beneath the shade of the broad-spreading oak trees, talking and jesting
    and laughing. All around stood the horses of the band, with a great
    noise of stamping feet and a great switching of tails. To this inn came
    the King's rangers, driving the widow's three sons before them. The
    hands of the three youths were tied tightly behind their backs, and a
    cord from neck to neck fastened them all together. So they were marched
    to the room where the Sheriff sat at meat, and stood trembling before
    him as he scowled sternly upon them.

    "So," quoth he, in a great, loud, angry voice, "ye have been poaching
    upon the King's deer, have you? Now I will make short work of you this
    day, for I will hang up all three of you as a farmer would hang up three
    crows to scare others of the kind from the field. Our fair county of
    Nottingham hath been too long a breeding place for such naughty knaves
    as ye are. I have put up with these things for many years, but now I
    will stamp them out once for all, and with you I will begin."

    Then one of the poor fellows opened his mouth to speak, but the Sheriff
    roared at him in a loud voice to be silent, and bade the rangers to take
    them away till he had done his eating and could attend to the matters
    concerning them. So the three poor youths were marched outside, where
    they stood with bowed heads and despairing hearts, till after a while
    the Sheriff came forth. Then he called his men about him, and quoth he,
    "These three villains shall be hanged straightway, but not here, lest
    they breed ill luck to this goodly inn. We will take them over yonder to
    that belt of woodlands, for I would fain hang them upon the very trees
    of Sherwood itself, to show those vile outlaws therein what they may
    expect of me if I ever have the good luck to lay hands upon them." So
    saying, he mounted his horse, as did his men-at-arms likewise, and all
    together they set forth for the belt of woodlands he had spoken of, the
    poor youths walking in their midst guarded by the rangers. So they came
    at last to the spot, and here nooses were fastened around the necks of
    the three, and the ends of the cords flung over the branch of a great
    oak tree that stood there. Then the three youths fell upon their knees
    and loudly besought mercy of the Sheriff; but the Sheriff of Nottingham
    laughed scornfully. "Now," quoth he, "I would that I had a priest here
    to shrive you; but, as none is nigh, you must e'en travel your road with
    all your sins packed upon your backs, and trust to Saint Peter to let
    you in through the gates of Paradise like three peddlers into the town."

    In the meantime, while all this had been going forward, an old man had
    drawn near and stood leaning on his staff, looking on. His hair and
    beard were all curly and white, and across his back was a bow of yew
    that looked much too strong for him to draw. As the Sheriff looked
    around ere he ordered his men to string the three youths up to the oak
    tree, his eyes fell upon this strange old man. Then his worship beckoned
    to him, saying, "Come hither, father, I have a few words to say to
    thee." So Little John, for it was none other than he, came forward, and
    the Sheriff looked upon him, thinking that there was something strangely
    familiar in the face before him. "How, now," said he, "methinks I have
    seen thee before. What may thy name be, father?"

    "Please Your Worship," said Little John, in a cracked voice like that of
    an old man, "my name is Giles Hobble, at Your Worship's service."

    "Giles Hobble, Giles Hobble," muttered the Sheriff to himself, turning
    over the names that he had in his mind to try to find one to fit to
    this. "I remember not thy name," said he at last, "but it matters not.
    Hast thou a mind to earn sixpence this bright morn?"

    "Ay, marry," quoth Little John, "for money is not so plenty with me that
    I should cast sixpence away an I could earn it by an honest turn. What
    is it Your Worship would have me do?"

    "Why, this," said the Sheriff. "Here are three men that need hanging
    as badly as any e'er I saw. If thou wilt string them up I will pay thee
    twopence apiece for them. I like not that my men-at-arms should turn
    hangmen. Wilt thou try thy hand?"

    "In sooth," said Little John, still in the old man's voice, "I ha' never
    done such a thing before; but an a sixpence is to be earned so easily
    I might as well ha' it as anybody. But, Your Worship, are these naughty
    fellows shrived?"

    "Nay," said the Sheriff, laughing, "never a whit; but thou mayst turn
    thy hand to that also if thou art so minded. But hasten, I prythee, for
    I would get back to mine inn betimes."

    So Little John came to where the three youths stood trembling, and,
    putting his face to the first fellow's cheek as though he were listening
    to him, he whispered softly into his ear, "Stand still, brother, when
    thou feelest thy bonds cut, but when thou seest me throw my woolen wig
    and beard from my head and face, cast the noose from thy neck and run
    for the woodlands." Then he slyly cut the cord that bound the youth's
    hands; who, upon his part, stood still as though he were yet bound. Then
    he went to the second fellow, and spoke to him in the same way, and also
    cut his bonds. This he did to the third likewise, but all so slyly that
    the Sheriff, who sat upon his horse laughing, wotted not what was being
    done, nor his men either.

    Then Little John turned to the Sheriff. "Please Your Worship," said he,
    "will you give me leave to string my bow? For I would fain help these
    fellows along the way, when they are swinging, with an arrow beneath the
    ribs."

    "With all my heart," said the Sheriff, "only, as I said before, make
    thou haste in thy doings."

    Little John put the tip of his bow to his instep, and strung the weapon
    so deftly that all wondered to see an old man so strong. Next he drew
    a good smooth arrow from his quiver and fitted it to the string; then,
    looking all around to see that the way was clear behind him, he suddenly
    cast away the wool from his head and face, shouting in a mighty voice,
    "Run!" Quick as a flash the three youths flung the nooses from their
    necks and sped across the open to the woodlands as the arrow speeds from
    the bow. Little John also flew toward the covert like a greyhound, while
    the Sheriff and his men gazed after him all bewildered with the sudden
    doing. But ere the yeoman had gone far the Sheriff roused himself.
    "After him!" he roared in a mighty voice; for he knew now who it was
    with whom he had been talking, and wondered that he had not known him
    before.

    Little John heard the Sheriff's words, and seeing that he could not hope
    to reach the woodlands before they would be upon him, he stopped and
    turned suddenly, holding his bow as though he were about to shoot.
    "Stand back!" cried he fiercely. "The first man that cometh a foot
    forward, or toucheth finger to bowstring, dieth!"

    At these words the Sheriff's men stood as still as stocks, for they knew
    right well that Little John would be as good as his word, and that to
    disobey him meant death. In vain the Sheriff roared at them, calling
    them cowards, and urging them forward in a body; they would not budge an
    inch, but stood and watched Little John as he moved slowly away toward
    the forest, keeping his gaze fixed upon them. But when the Sheriff saw
    his enemy thus slipping betwixt his fingers he grew mad with his rage,
    so that his head swam and he knew not what he did. Then of a sudden he
    turned his horse's head, and plunging his spurs into its sides he gave
    a great shout, and, rising in his stirrups, came down upon Little John
    like the wind. Then Little John raised his deadly bow and drew the gray
    goose feather to his cheek. But alas for him! For, ere he could loose
    the shaft, the good bow that had served him so long, split in his hands,
    and the arrow fell harmless at his feet. Seeing what had happened, the
    Sheriff's men raised a shout, and, following their master, came rushing
    down upon Little John. But the Sheriff was ahead of the others, and
    so caught up with the yeoman before he reached the shelter of the
    woodlands, then leaning forward he struck a mighty blow. Little John
    ducked and the Sheriff's sword turned in his hand, but the flat of the
    blade struck the other upon the head and smote him down, stunned and
    senseless.

    "Now, I am right glad," said the Sheriff, when the men came up and found
    that Little John was not dead, "that I have not slain this man in my
    haste! I would rather lose five hundred pounds than have him die thus
    instead of hanging, as such a vile thief should do. Go, get some water
    from yonder fountain, William, and pour it over his head."

    The man did as he was bidden, and presently Little John opened his eyes
    and looked around him, all dazed and bewildered with the stun of the
    blow. Then they tied his hands behind him, and lifting him up set him
    upon the back of one of the horses, with his face to its tail and his
    feet strapped beneath its belly. So they took him back to the King's
    Head Inn, laughing and rejoicing as they went along. But in the meantime
    the widow's three sons had gotten safely away, and were hidden in the
    woodlands.

    Once more the Sheriff of Nottingham sat within the King's Head Inn. His
    heart rejoiced within him, for he had at last done that which he had
    sought to do for years, taken Little John prisoner. Quoth he to himself,
    "This time tomorrow the rogue shall hang upon the gallows tree in front
    of the great gate of Nottingham Town, and thus shall I make my long
    score with him even." So saying, he took a deep draught of Canary. But
    it seemed as if the Sheriff had swallowed a thought with his wine, for
    he shook his head and put the cup down hastily. "Now," he muttered
    to himself, "I would not for a thousand pounds have this fellow slip
    through my fingers; yet, should his master escape that foul Guy of
    Gisbourne, there is no knowing what he may do, for he is the cunningest
    knave in all the world - this same Robin Hood. Belike I had better not
    wait until tomorrow to hang the fellow." So saying, he pushed his chair
    back hastily, and going forth from the inn called his men together.
    Quoth he, "I will wait no longer for the hanging of this rogue, but it
    shall be done forthwith, and that from the very tree whence he saved
    those three young villains by stepping betwixt them and the law. So get
    ye ready straightway."

    Then once more they sat Little John upon the horse, with his face to the
    tail, and so, one leading the horse whereon he sat and the others riding
    around him, they went forward to that tree from the branches of which
    they had thought to hang the poachers. On they went, rattling and
    jingling along the road till they came to the tree. Here one of the men
    spake to the Sheriff of a sudden. "Your Worship," cried he, "is not yon
    fellow coming along toward us that same Guy of Gisbourne whom thou didst
    send into the forest to seek Robin Hood?" At these words the Sheriff
    shaded his eyes and looked eagerly. "Why, certes," quoth he, "yon fellow
    is the same. Now, Heaven send that he hath slain the master thief, as we
    will presently slay the man!"

    When Little John heard this speech he looked up, and straightway his
    heart crumbled away within him, for not only were the man's garments all
    covered with blood, but he wore Robin Hood's bugle horn and carried his
    bow and broadsword.

    "How now!" cried the Sheriff, when Robin Hood, in Guy of Gisbourne's
    clothes, had come nigh to them. "What luck hath befallen thee in the
    forest? Why, man, thy clothes are all over blood!"

    "An thou likest not my clothes," said Robin in a harsh voice like that
    of Guy of Gisbourne, "thou mayst shut thine eyes. Marry, the blood upon
    me is that of the vilest outlaw that ever trod the woodlands, and one
    whom I have slain this day, albeit not without wound to myself."

    Then out spake Little John, for the first time since he had fallen into
    the Sheriff's hands. "O thou vile, bloody wretch! I know thee, Guy of
    Gisbourne, for who is there that hath not heard of thee and cursed thee
    for thy vile deeds of blood and rapine? Is it by such a hand as thine
    that the gentlest heart that ever beat is stilled in death? Truly,
    thou art a fit tool for this coward Sheriff of Nottingham. Now I die
    joyfully, nor do I care how I die, for life is nought to me!" So spake
    Little John, the salt tears rolling down his brown cheeks.

    But the Sheriff of Nottingham clapped his hands for joy. "Now, Guy of
    Gisbourne," cried he, "if what thou tellest me is true, it will be the
    best day's doings for thee that ever thou hast done in all thy life."

    "What I have told thee is sooth, and I lie not," said Robin, still in
    Guy of Gisbourne's voice. "Look, is not this Robin Hood's sword, and is
    not this his good bow of yew, and is not this his bugle horn? Thinkest
    thou he would have given them to Guy of Gisbourne of his own free will?"

    Then the Sheriff laughed aloud for joy. "This is a good day!" cried he.
    "The great outlaw dead and his right-hand man in my hands! Ask what thou
    wilt of me, Guy of Gisbourne, and it is thine!"

    "Then this I ask of thee," said Robin. "As I have slain the master
    I would now kill the man. Give this fellow's life into my hands, Sir
    Sheriff."

    "Now thou art a fool!" cried the Sheriff. "Thou mightst have had money
    enough for a knight's ransom if thou hadst asked for it. I like ill to
    let this fellow pass from my hands, but as I have promised, thou shalt
    have him."

    "I thank thee right heartily for thy gift," cried Robin. "Take the rogue
    down from the horse, men, and lean him against yonder tree, while I show
    you how we stick a porker whence I come!"

    At these words some of the Sheriff's men shook their heads; for, though
    they cared not a whit whether Little John were hanged or not, they hated
    to see him butchered in cold blood. But the Sheriff called to them in
    a loud voice, ordering them to take the yeoman down from the horse and
    lean him against the tree, as the other bade.

    While they were doing this Robin Hood strung both his bow and that of
    Guy of Gisbourne, albeit none of them took notice of his doing so. Then,
    when Little John stood against the tree, he drew Guy of Gisbourne's
    sharp, double-edged dagger. "Fall back! fall back!" cried he. "Would
    ye crowd so on my pleasure, ye unmannerly knaves? Back, I say! Farther
    yet!" So they crowded back, as he ordered, many of them turning their
    faces away, that they might not see what was about to happen.

    "Come!" cried Little John. "Here is my breast. It is meet that the same
    hand that slew my dear master should butcher me also! I know thee, Guy
    of Gisbourne!"

    "Peace, Little John!" said Robin in a low voice. "Twice thou hast said
    thou knowest me, and yet thou knowest me not at all. Couldst thou not
    tell me beneath this wild beast's hide? Yonder, just in front of thee,
    lie my bow and arrows, likewise my broadsword. Take them when I cut thy
    bonds. Now! Get them quickly!" So saying, he cut the bonds, and Little
    John, quick as a wink, leaped forward and caught up the bow and arrows
    and the broadsword. At the same time Robin Hood threw back the cowl of
    horse's hide from his face and bent Guy of Gisbourne's bow, with a keen,
    barbed arrow fitted to the string. "Stand back!" cried he sternly. "The
    first man that toucheth finger to bowstring dieth! I have slain thy
    man, Sheriff; take heed that it is not thy turn next." Then, seeing that
    Little John had armed himself, he clapped his bugle horn to his lips and
    blew three blasts both loud and shrill.

    Now when the Sheriff of Nottingham saw whose face it was beneath Guy of
    Gisbourne's hood, and when he heard those bugle notes ring in his ear,
    he felt as if his hour had come. "Robin Hood!" roared he, and without
    another word he wheeled his horse in the road and went off in a cloud of
    dust. The Sheriff's men, seeing their master thus fleeing for his life,
    thought that it was not their business to tarry longer, so, clapping
    spurs to their horses, they also dashed away after him. But though
    the Sheriff of Nottingham went fast, he could not outstrip a clothyard
    arrow. Little John twanged his bowstring with a shout, and when the
    Sheriff dashed in through the gates of Nottingham Town at full speed, a
    gray goose shaft stuck out behind him like a moulting sparrow with one
    feather in its tail. For a month afterward the poor Sheriff could sit
    upon nought but the softest cushions that could be gotten for him.

    Thus the Sheriff and a score of men ran away from Robin Hood and Little
    John; so that when Will Stutely and a dozen or more of stout yeomen
    burst from out the covert, they saw nought of their master's enemies,
    for the Sheriff and his men were scurrying away in the distance, hidden
    within a cloud of dust like a little thunderstorm.

    Then they all went back into the forest once more, where they found the
    widow's three sons, who ran to Little John and kissed his hands. But
    it would not do for them to roam the forest at large any more; so
    they promised that, after they had gone and told their mother of
    their escape, they would come that night to the greenwood tree, and
    thenceforth become men of the band.




    King Richard Comes to Sherwood Forest

    NOT MORE than two months had passed and gone since these stirring
    adventures befell Robin Hood and Little John, when all Nottinghamshire
    was a mighty stir and tumult, for King Richard of the Lion's Heart was
    making a royal progress through merry England, and everyone expected
    him to come to Nottingham Town in his journeying. Messengers went riding
    back and forth between the Sheriff and the King, until at last the time
    was fixed upon when His Majesty was to stop in Nottingham, as the guest
    of his worship.

    And now came more bustle than ever; a great running hither and thither,
    a rapping of hammers and a babble of voices sounded everywhere through
    the place, for the folk were building great arches across the streets,
    beneath which the King was to pass, and were draping these arches with
    silken banners and streamers of many colors. Great hubbub was going on
    in the Guild Hall of the town, also, for here a grand banquet was to
    be given to the King and the nobles of his train, and the best master
    carpenters were busy building a throne where the King and the Sheriff
    were to sit at the head of the table, side by side.

    It seemed to many of the good folk of the place as if the day that
    should bring the King into the town would never come; but all the same
    it did come in its own season, and bright shone the sun down into the
    stony streets, which were all alive with a restless sea of people.
    On either side of the way great crowds of town and country folk stood
    packed as close together as dried herring in a box, so that the Sheriffs
    men, halberds in hands, could hardly press them back to leave space for
    the King's riding.

    "Take care whom thou pushest against!" cried a great, burly friar to one
    of these men. "Wouldst thou dig thine elbows into me, sirrah? By'r Lady
    of the Fountain, an thou dost not treat me with more deference I will
    crack thy knave's pate for thee, even though thou be one of the mighty
    Sheriff's men."

    At this a great shout of laughter arose from a number of tall yeomen in
    Lincoln green that were scattered through the crowd thereabouts; but one
    that seemed of more authority than the others nudged the holy man with
    his elbow. "Peace, Tuck," said he, "didst thou not promise me, ere thou
    camest here, that thou wouldst put a check upon thy tongue?"

    "Ay, marry," grumbled the other, "but 'a did not think to have a
    hard-footed knave trample all over my poor toes as though they were no
    more than so many acorns in the forest."

    But of a sudden all this bickering ceased, for a clear sound of many
    bugle horns came winding down the street. Then all the people craned
    their necks and gazed in the direction whence the sound came, and the
    crowding and the pushing and the swaying grew greater than ever. And now
    a gallant array of men came gleaming into sight, and the cheering of the
    people ran down the crowd as the fire runs in dry grass.

    Eight and twenty heralds in velvet and cloth of gold came riding
    forward. Over their heads fluttered a cloud of snow-white feathers,
    and each herald bore in his hand a long silver trumpet, which he blew
    musically. From each trumpet hung a heavy banner of velvet and cloth
    of gold, with the royal arms of England emblazoned thereon. After these
    came riding fivescore noble knights, two by two, all fully armed, saving
    that their heads were uncovered. In their hands they bore tall lances,
    from the tops of which fluttered pennons of many colors and devices. By
    the side of each knight walked a page clad in rich clothes of silk and
    velvet, and each page bore in his hands his master's helmet, from which
    waved long, floating plumes of feathers. Never had Nottingham seen a
    fairer sight than those fivescore noble knights, from whose armor the
    sun blazed in dazzling light as they came riding on their great war
    horses, with clashing of arms and jingling of chains. Behind the knights
    came the barons and the nobles of the mid-country, in robes of silk and
    cloth of gold, with golden chains about their necks and jewels at their
    girdles. Behind these again came a great array of men-at-arms, with
    spears and halberds in their hands, and, in the midst of these, two
    riders side by side. One of the horsemen was the Sheriff of Nottingham
    in his robes of office. The other, who was a head taller than the
    Sheriff, was clad in a rich but simple garb, with a broad, heavy chain
    about his neck. His hair and beard were like threads of gold, and his
    eyes were as blue as the summer sky. As he rode along he bowed to the
    right hand and the left, and a mighty roar of voices followed him as he
    passed; for this was King Richard.

    Then, above all the tumult and the shouting a great voice was heard
    roaring, "Heaven, its saints bless thee, our gracious King Richard!
    and likewise Our Lady of the Fountain, bless thee!" Then King Richard,
    looking toward the spot whence the sound came, saw a tall, burly,
    strapping priest standing in front of all the crowd with his legs wide
    apart as he backed against those behind.

    "By my soul, Sheriff," said the King, laughing, "ye have the tallest
    priests in Nottinghamshire that e'er I saw in all my life. If
    Heaven never answered prayers because of deafness, methinks I would
    nevertheless have blessings bestowed upon me, for that man yonder would
    make the great stone image of Saint Peter rub its ears and hearken unto
    him. I would that I had an army of such as he."

    To this the Sheriff answered never a word, but all the blood left his
    cheeks, and he caught at the pommel of his saddle to keep himself from
    falling; for he also saw the fellow that so shouted, and knew him to be
    Friar Tuck; and, moreover, behind Friar Tuck he saw the faces of Robin
    Hood and Little John and Will Scarlet and Will Stutely and Allan a Dale
    and others of the band.

    "How now," said the King hastily, "art thou ill, Sheriff, that thou
    growest so white?"

    "Nay, Your Majesty," said the Sheriff, "it was nought but a sudden pain
    that will soon pass by." Thus he spake, for he was ashamed that the King
    should know that Robin Hood feared him so little that he thus dared to
    come within the very gates of Nottingham Town.

    Thus rode the King into Nottingham Town on that bright afternoon in the
    early fall season; and none rejoiced more than Robin Hood and his merry
    men to see him come so royally unto his own.


    Eventide had come; the great feast in the Guild Hall at Nottingham Town
    was done, and the wine passed freely. A thousand waxen lights gleamed
    along the board, at which sat lord and noble and knight and squire in
    goodly array. At the head of the table, upon a throne all hung with
    cloth of gold, sat King Richard with the Sheriff of Nottingham beside
    him.

    Quoth the King to the Sheriff, laughing as he spoke, "I have heard much
    spoken concerning the doings of certain fellows hereabouts, one Robin
    Hood and his band, who are outlaws and abide in Sherwood Forest. Canst
    thou not tell me somewhat of them, Sir Sheriff? For I hear that thou
    hast had dealings with them more than once."

    At these words the Sheriff of Nottingham looked down gloomily, and the
    Bishop of Hereford, who was present, gnawed his nether lip. Quoth the
    Sheriff, "I can tell Your Majesty but little concerning the doings of
    those naughty fellows, saving that they are the boldest lawbreakers in
    all the land."

    Then up spake young Sir Henry of the Lea, a great favorite with the
    King, under whom he had fought in Palestine. "May it please Your
    Majesty," said he, "when I was away in Palestine I heard ofttimes from
    my father, and in most cases I heard of this very fellow, Robin Hood.
    If Your Majesty would like I will tell you a certain adventure of this
    outlaw."

    Then the King laughingly bade him tell his tale, whereupon he told
    how Robin Hood had aided Sir Richard of the Lea with money that he had
    borrowed from the Bishop of Hereford. Again and again the King and those
    present roared with laughter, while the poor Bishop waxed cherry red in
    the face with vexation, for the matter was a sore thing with him. When
    Sir Henry of the Lea was done, others of those present, seeing how the
    King enjoyed this merry tale, told other tales concerning Robin and his
    merry men.

    "By the hilt of my sword," said stout King Richard, "this is as bold and
    merry a knave as ever I heard tell of. Marry, I must take this matter in
    hand and do what thou couldst not do, Sheriff, to wit, clear the forest
    of him and his band."

    That night the King sat in the place that was set apart for his lodging
    while in Nottingham Town. With him were young Sir Henry of the Lea and
    two other knights and three barons of Nottinghamshire; but the King's
    mind still dwelled upon Robin Hood. "Now," quoth he, "I would freely
    give a hundred pounds to meet this roguish fellow, Robin Hood, and to
    see somewhat of his doings in Sherwood Forest."

    Then up spake Sir Hubert of gingham, laughing: "If Your Majesty hath
    such a desire upon you it is not so hard to satisfy. If Your Majesty is
    willing to lose one hundred pounds, I will engage to cause you not only
    to meet this fellow, but to feast with him in Sherwood."

    "Marry, Sir Hubert," quoth the King, "this pleaseth me well. But how
    wilt thou cause me to meet Robin Hood?"

    "Why, thus," said Sir Hubert, "let Your Majesty and us here present put
    on the robes of seven of the Order of Black Friars, and let Your Majesty
    hang a purse of one hundred pounds beneath your gown; then let us
    undertake to ride from here to Mansfield Town tomorrow, and, without I
    am much mistaken, we will both meet with Robin Hood and dine with him
    before the day be passed."

    "I like thy plan, Sir Hubert," quoth the King merrily, "and tomorrow we
    will try it and see whether there be virtue in it."

    So it happened that when early the next morning the Sheriff came to
    where his liege lord was abiding, to pay his duty to him, the King told
    him what they had talked of the night before, and what merry adventure
    they were set upon undertaking that morning. But when the Sheriff heard
    this he smote his forehead with his fist. "Alas!" said he, "what evil
    counsel is this that hath been given thee! O my gracious lord and King,
    you know not what you do! This villain that you thus go to seek hath no
    reverence either for king or king's laws."

    "But did I not hear aright when I was told that this Robin Hood hath
    shed no blood since he was outlawed, saving only that of that vile Guy
    of Gisbourne, for whose death all honest men should thank him?"

    "Yea, Your Majesty," said the Sheriff, "you have heard aright.
    Nevertheless - "

    "Then," quoth the King, breaking in on the Sheriffs speech, "what have
    I to fear in meeting him, having done him no harm? Truly, there is no
    danger in this. But mayhap thou wilt go with us, Sir Sheriff."

    "Nay," quoth the Sheriff hastily, "Heaven forbid!"

    But now seven habits such as Black Friars wear were brought, and the
    King and those about him having clad themselves therein, and His Majesty
    having hung a purse with a hundred golden pounds in it beneath his
    robes, they all went forth and mounted the mules that had been brought
    to the door for them. Then the King bade the Sheriff be silent as
    to their doings, and so they set forth upon their way. Onward they
    traveled, laughing and jesting, until they passed through the open
    country; between bare harvest fields whence the harvest had been
    gathered home; through scattered glades that began to thicken as they
    went farther along, till they came within the heavy shade of the forest
    itself. They traveled in the forest for several miles without meeting
    anyone such as they sought, until they had come to that part of the road
    that lay nearest to Newstead Abbey.

    "By the holy Saint Martin," quoth the King, "I would that I had a better
    head for remembering things of great need. Here have we come away and
    brought never so much as a drop of anything to drink with us. Now
    I would give half a hundred pounds for somewhat to quench my thirst
    withal."

    No sooner had the King so spoken, than out from the covert at the
    roadside stepped a tall fellow with yellow beard and hair and a pair of
    merry blue eyes. "Truly, holy brother," said he, laying his hand upon
    the King's bridle rein, "it were an unchristian thing to not give
    fitting answer to so fair a bargain. We keep an inn hereabouts, and for
    fifty pounds we will not only give thee a good draught of wine, but will
    give thee as noble a feast as ever thou didst tickle thy gullet withal."
    So saying, he put his fingers to his lips and blew a shrill whistle.
    Then straightway the bushes and branches on either side of the road
    swayed and crackled, and threescore broad-shouldered yeomen in Lincoln
    green burst out of the covert.

    "How now, fellow," quoth the King, "who art thou, thou naughty rogue?
    Hast thou no regard for such holy men as we are?"

    "Not a whit," quoth merry Robin Hood, for the fellow was he, "for in
    sooth all the holiness belonging to rich friars, such as ye are, one
    could drop into a thimble and the goodwife would never feel it with the
    tip of her finger. As for my name, it is Robin Hood, and thou mayst have
    heard it before."

    "Now out upon thee!" quoth King Richard. "Thou art a bold and naughty
    fellow and a lawless one withal, as I have often heard tell. Now,
    prythee, let me, and these brethren of mine, travel forward in peace and
    quietness."

    "It may not be," said Robin, "for it would look but ill of us to let
    such holy men travel onward with empty stomachs. But I doubt not that
    thou hast a fat purse to pay thy score at our inn since thou offerest
    freely so much for a poor draught of wine. Show me thy purse, reverend
    brother, or I may perchance have to strip thy robes from thee to search
    for it myself."

    "Nay, use no force," said the King sternly. "Here is my purse, but lay
    not thy lawless hands upon our person."

    "Hut, tut," quoth merry Robin, "what proud words are these? Art thou the
    King of England, to talk so to me? Here, Will, take this purse and see
    what there is within."

    Will Scarlet took the purse and counted out the money. Then Robin bade
    him keep fifty pounds for themselves, and put fifty back into the purse.
    This he handed to the King. "Here, brother," quoth he, "take this half
    of thy money, and thank Saint Martin, on whom thou didst call before,
    that thou hast fallen into the hands of such gentle rogues that they
    will not strip thee bare, as they might do. But wilt thou not put back
    thy cowl? For I would fain see thy face."

    "Nay," said the King, drawing back, "I may not put back my cowl, for
    we seven have vowed that we will not show our faces for four and twenty
    hours."

    "Then keep them covered in peace," said Robin, "and far be it from me to
    make you break your vows."

    So he called seven of his yeomen and bade them each one take a mule
    by the bridle; then, turning their faces toward the depths of the
    woodlands, they journeyed onward until they came to the open glade and
    the greenwood tree.

    Little John, with threescore yeomen at his heels, had also gone forth
    that morning to wait along the roads and bring a rich guest to Sherwood
    glade, if such might be his luck, for many with fat purses must
    travel the roads at this time, when such great doings were going on in
    Nottinghamshire, but though Little John and so many others were gone,
    Friar Tuck and twoscore or more stout yeomen were seated or lying around
    beneath the great tree, and when Robin and the others came they leaped
    to their feet to meet him.

    "By my soul," quoth merry King Richard, when he had gotten down from his
    mule and stood looking about him, "thou hast in very truth a fine lot of
    young men about thee, Robin. Methinks King Richard himself would be glad
    of such a bodyguard."

    "These are not all of my fellows," said Robin proudly, "for threescore
    more of them are away on business with my good right-hand man, Little
    John. But, as for King Richard, I tell thee, brother, there is not a man
    of us all but would pour out our blood like water for him. Ye churchmen
    cannot rightly understand our King; but we yeomen love him right loyally
    for the sake of his brave doings which are so like our own."

    But now Friar Tuck came bustling up. "Gi' ye good den, brothers," said
    he. "I am right glad to welcome some of my cloth in this naughty place.
    Truly, methinks these rogues of outlaws would stand but an ill chance
    were it not for the prayers of Holy Tuck, who laboreth so hard for their
    well-being." Here he winked one eye slyly and stuck his tongue into his
    cheek.

    "Who art thou, mad priest?" said the King in a serious voice, albeit he
    smiled beneath his cowl.

    At this Friar Tuck looked all around with a slow gaze. "Look you now,"
    quoth he, "never let me hear you say again that I am no patient man.
    Here is a knave of a friar calleth me a mad priest, and yet I smite him
    not. My name is Friar Tuck, fellow - the holy Friar Tuck."

    "There, Tuck," said Robin, "thou hast said enow. Prythee, cease thy talk
    and bring some wine. These reverend men are athirst, and sin' they have
    paid so richly for their score they must e'en have the best."

    Friar Tuck bridled at being so checked in his speech, nevertheless he
    went straightway to do Robin's bidding; so presently a great crock was
    brought, and wine was poured out for all the guests and for Robin Hood.
    Then Robin held his cup aloft. "Stay!" cried he. "Tarry in your drinking
    till I give you a pledge. Here is to good King Richard of great renown,
    and may all enemies to him be confounded."

    Then all drank the King's health, even the King himself. "Methinks, good
    fellow," said he, "thou hast drunk to thine own confusion."

    "Never a whit," quoth merry Robin, "for I tell thee that we of Sherwood
    are more loyal to our lord the King than those of thine order. We would
    give up our lives for his benefiting, while ye are content to lie snug
    in your abbeys and priories let reign who will."

    At this the King laughed. Quoth he, "Perhaps King Richard's welfare is
    more to me than thou wottest of, fellow. But enough of that matter.
    We have paid well for our fare, so canst thou not show us some merry
    entertainment? I have oft heard that ye are wondrous archers; wilt thou
    not show us somewhat of your skill?"

    "With all my heart," said Robin, "we are always pleased to show our
    guests all the sport that is to be seen. As Gaffer Swanthold sayeth,
    ''Tis a hard heart that will not give a caged starling of the best'; and
    caged starlings ye are with us. Ho, lads! Set up a garland at the end of
    the glade."

    Then, as the yeomen ran to do their master's bidding, Tuck turned to
    one of the mock friars. "Hearest thou our master?" quoth he, with a sly
    wink. "Whenever he cometh across some poor piece of wit he straightway
    layeth it on the shoulders of this Gaffer Swanthold - whoever he may
    be - so that the poor goodman goeth traveling about with all the odds and
    ends and tags and rags of our master's brain packed on his back." Thus
    spake Friar Tuck, but in a low voice so that Robin could not hear him,
    for he felt somewhat nettled at Robin's cutting his talk so short.

    In the meantime the mark at which they were to shoot was set up at
    sixscore paces distance. It was a garland of leaves and flowers two
    spans in width, which same was hung upon a stake in front of a broad
    tree trunk. "There," quoth Robin, "yon is a fair mark, lads. Each of you
    shoot three arrows thereat; and if any fellow misseth by so much as one
    arrow, he shall have a buffet of Will Scarlet's fist."

    "Hearken to him!" quoth Friar Tuck. "Why, master, thou dost bestow
    buffets from thy strapping nephew as though they were love taps from
    some bouncing lass. I warrant thou art safe to hit the garland thyself,
    or thou wouldst not be so free of his cuffing."

    First David of Doncaster shot, and lodged all three of his arrows within
    the garland. "Well done, David!" cried Robin, "thou hast saved thine
    ears from a warming this day." Next Midge, the Miller, shot, and he,
    also, lodged his arrows in the garland. Then followed Wat, the Tinker,
    but alas for him! For one of his shafts missed the mark by the breadth
    of two fingers.

    "Come hither, fellow," said Will Scarlet, in his soft, gentle voice,
    "I owe thee somewhat that I would pay forthwith." Then Wat, the Tinker,
    came forward and stood in front of Will Scarlet, screwing up his face
    and shutting his eyes tightly, as though he already felt his ears
    ringing with the buffet. Will Scarlet rolled up his sleeve, and,
    standing on tiptoe to give the greater swing to his arm, he struck with
    might and main. "WHOOF!" came his palm against the Tinker's head, and
    down went stout Wat to the grass, heels over head, as the wooden image
    at the fair goes down when the skillful player throws a cudgel at it.
    Then, as the Tinker sat up upon the grass, rubbing his ear and winking
    and blinking at the bright stars that danced before his eyes, the yeomen
    roared with mirth till the forest rang. As for King Richard, he laughed
    till the tears ran down his cheeks. Thus the band shot, each in turn,
    some getting off scot free, and some winning a buffet that always sent
    them to the grass. And now, last of all, Robin took his place, and all
    was hushed as he shot. The first shaft he shot split a piece from the
    stake on which the garland was hung; the second lodged within an inch of
    the other. "By my halidom," said King Richard to himself, "I would give
    a thousand pounds for this fellow to be one of my guard!" And now,
    for the third time Robin shot; but, alas for him! The arrow was
    ill-feathered, and, wavering to one side, it smote an inch outside the
    garland.

    At this a great roar went up, those of the yeomen who sat upon the grass
    rolling over and over and shouting with laughter, for never before had
    they seen their master so miss his mark; but Robin flung his bow upon
    the ground with vexation. "Now, out upon it!" cried he. "That shaft had
    an ill feather to it, for I felt it as it left my fingers. Give me a
    clean arrow, and I will engage to split the wand with it."

    At these words the yeomen laughed louder than ever. "Nay, good uncle,"
    said Will Scarlet in his soft, sweet voice, "thou hast had thy fair
    chance and hast missed thine aim out and out. I swear the arrow was
    as good as any that hath been loosed this day. Come hither; I owe thee
    somewhat, and would fain pay it."

    "Go, good master," roared Friar Tuck, "and may my blessing go with thee.
    Thou hast bestowed these love taps of Will Scarlet's with great freedom.
    It were pity an thou gottest not thine own share."

    "It may not be," said merry Robin. "I am king here, and no subject may
    raise hand against the king. But even our great King Richard may yield
    to the holy Pope without shame, and even take a tap from him by way of
    penance; therefore I will yield myself to this holy friar, who seemeth
    to be one in authority, and will take my punishment from him." Thus
    saying, he turned to the King, "I prythee, brother, wilt thou take my
    punishing into thy holy hands?"

    "With all my heart," quoth merry King Richard, rising from where he was
    sitting. "I owe thee somewhat for having lifted a heavy weight of fifty
    pounds from my purse. So make room for him on the green, lads."

    "An thou makest me tumble," quoth Robin, "I will freely give thee back
    thy fifty pounds; but I tell thee, brother, if thou makest me not feel
    grass all along my back, I will take every farthing thou hast for thy
    boastful speech."

    "So be it," said the King, "I am willing to venture it." Thereupon he
    rolled up his sleeve and showed an arm that made the yeomen stare.
    But Robin, with his feet wide apart, stood firmly planted, waiting the
    other, smiling. Then the King swung back his arm, and, balancing himself
    a moment, he delivered a buffet at Robin that fell like a thunderbolt.
    Down went Robin headlong upon the grass, for the stroke would have
    felled a stone wall. Then how the yeomen shouted with laughter till
    their sides ached, for never had they seen such a buffet given in all
    their lives. As for Robin, he presently sat up and looked all around
    him, as though he had dropped from a cloud and had lit in a place he had
    never seen before. After a while, still gazing about him at his laughing
    yeomen, he put his fingertips softly to his ear and felt all around
    it tenderly. "Will Scarlet," said he, "count this fellow out his fifty
    pounds; I want nothing more either of his money or of him. A murrain
    seize him and his buffeting! I would that I had taken my dues from thee,
    for I verily believe he hath deafened mine ear from ever hearing again."

    Then, while gusts of laughter still broke from the band, Will Scarlet
    counted out the fifty pounds, and the King dropped it back into his
    purse again. "I give thee thanks, fellow," said he, "and if ever thou
    shouldst wish for another box of the ear to match the one thou hast,
    come to me and I will fit thee with it for nought."

    So spake the merry King; but, even as he ended, there came suddenly
    the sound of many voices, and out from the covert burst Little John and
    threescore men, with Sir Richard of the Lea in the midst. Across the
    glade they came running, and, as they came, Sir Richard shouted to
    Robin: "Make haste, dear friend, gather thy band together and come with
    me! King Richard left Nottingham Town this very morning, and cometh to
    seek thee in the woodlands. I know not how he cometh, for it was but
    a rumor of this that reached me; nevertheless, I know that it is the
    truth. Therefore hasten with all thy men, and come to Castle Lea, for
    there thou mayst lie hidden till thy present danger passeth. Who are
    these strangers that thou hast with thee?"

    "Why," quoth merry Robin, rising from the grass, "these are certain
    gentle guests that came with us from the highroad over by Newstead
    Abbey. I know not their names, but I have become right well acquaint
    with this lusty rogue's palm this morning. Marry, the pleasure of this
    acquaintance hath dost me a deaf ear and fifty pounds to boot!"

    Sir Richard looked keenly at the tall friar, who, drawing himself up to
    his full height, looked fixedly back at the knight. Then of a sudden Sir
    Richard's cheeks grew pale, for he knew who it was that he looked upon.
    Quickly he leaped from off his horse's back and flung himself upon his
    knees before the other. At this, the King, seeing that Sir Richard knew
    him, threw back his cowl, and all the yeomen saw his face and knew him
    also, for there was not one of them but had been in the crowd in the
    good town of Nottingham, and had seen him riding side by side with the
    Sheriff. Down they fell upon their knees, nor could they say a word.
    Then the King looked all around right grimly, and, last of all, his
    glance came back and rested again upon Sir Richard of the Lea.

    "How is this, Sir Richard?" said he sternly. "How darest thou step
    between me and these fellows? And how darest thou offer thy knightly
    Castle of the Lea for a refuge to them? Wilt thou make it a hiding place
    for the most renowned outlaws in England?"

    Then Sir Richard of the Lea raised his eyes to the King's face. "Far be
    it from me," said he, "to do aught that could bring Your Majesty's anger
    upon me. Yet, sooner would I face Your Majesty's wrath than suffer aught
    of harm that I could stay to fall upon Robin Hood and his band; for to
    them I owe life, honor, everything. Should I, then, desert him in his
    hour of need?"

    Ere the knight had done speaking, one of the mock friars that stood near
    the King came forward and knelt beside Sir Richard, and throwing back
    his cowl showed the face of young Sir Henry of the Lea. Then Sir Henry
    grasped his father's hand and said, "Here kneels one who hath served
    thee well, King Richard, and, as thou knowest, hath stepped between thee
    and death in Palestine; yet do I abide by my dear father, and here I say
    also, that I would freely give shelter to this noble outlaw, Robin Hood,
    even though it brought thy wrath upon me, for my father's honor and my
    father's welfare are as dear to me as mine own."

    King Richard looked from one to the other of the kneeling knights,
    and at last the frown faded from his brow and a smile twitched at the
    corners of his lips. "Marry, Sir Richard," quoth the King, "thou art
    a bold-spoken knight, and thy freedom of speech weigheth not heavily
    against thee with me. This young son of thine taketh after his sire both
    in boldness of speech and of deed, for, as he sayeth, he stepped one
    time betwixt me and death; wherefore I would pardon thee for his sake
    even if thou hadst done more than thou hast. Rise all of you, for ye
    shall suffer no harm through me this day, for it were pity that a merry
    time should end in a manner as to mar its joyousness."

    Then all arose and the King beckoned Robin Hood to come to him. "How
    now," quoth he, "is thine ear still too deaf to hear me speak?"

    "Mine ears would be deafened in death ere they would cease to hear Your
    Majesty's voice," said Robin. "As for the blow that Your Majesty struck
    me, I would say that though my sins are haply many, methinks they have
    been paid up in full thereby."

    "Thinkest thou so?" said the King with somewhat of sternness in
    his voice. "Now I tell thee that but for three things, to wit, my
    mercifulness, my love for a stout woodsman, and the loyalty thou hast
    avowed for me, thine ears, mayhap, might have been more tightly closed
    than ever a buffet from me could have shut them. Talk not lightly of thy
    sins, good Robin. But come, look up. Thy danger is past, for hereby I
    give thee and all thy band free pardon. But, in sooth, I cannot let you
    roam the forest as ye have done in the past; therefore I will take thee
    at thy word, when thou didst say thou wouldst give thy service to me,
    and thou shalt go back to London with me. We will take that bold
    knave Little John also, and likewise thy cousin, Will Scarlet, and thy
    minstrel, Allan a Dale. As for the rest of thy band, we will take their
    names and have them duly recorded as royal rangers; for methinks it
    were wiser to have them changed to law-abiding caretakers of our deer in
    Sherwood than to leave them to run at large as outlawed slayers thereof.
    But now get a feast ready; I would see how ye live in the woodlands."

    So Robin bade his men make ready a grand feast. Straightway great
    fires were kindled and burned brightly, at which savory things roasted
    sweetly. While this was going forward, the King bade Robin call Allan
    a Dale, for he would hear him sing. So word was passed for Allan, and
    presently he came, bringing his harp.

    "Marry," said King Richard, "if thy singing match thy looks it is
    fair enough. Prythee, strike up a ditty and let us have a taste of thy
    skill."

    Then Allan touched his harp lightly, and all words were hushed while he
    sang thus:

         "'_Oh, where has thou been, my daughter?
         Oh, where hast thou been this day
         Daughter, my daughter?'
         'Oh, I have been to the river's side,
         Where the waters lie all gray and wide,
         And the gray sky broods o'er the leaden tide,
         And the shrill wind sighs a straining.'

         "'What sawest thou there, my daughter?
         What sawest thou there this day,
         Daughter, my daughter?'
         'Oh, I saw a boat come drifting nigh,
         Where the quivering rushes hiss and sigh,
         And the water soughs as it gurgles by,
         And the shrill wind sighs a straining.'

         "'What sailed in the boat, my daughter?
         What sailed in the boat this day,
         Daughter, my daughter?'
         'Oh, there was one all clad in white,
         And about his face hung a pallid light,
         And his eyes gleamed sharp like the stars at night,
         And the shrill wind sighed a straining.'

         "'And what said he, my daughter?
         What said he to thee this day,
         Daughter, my daughter?'
         'Oh, said he nought, but did he this:
         Thrice on my lips did he press a kiss,
         And my heartstrings shrunk with an awful bliss,
         And the shrill wind sighed a straining.'

         "'Why growest thou so cold, my daughter?
         Why growest thou so cold and white,
         Daughter, my daughter?'
         Oh, never a word the daughter said,
         But she sat all straight with a drooping head,
         For her heart was stilled and her face was dead:
         And the shrill wind sighed a straining_."

    All listened in silence; and when Allan a Dale had done King Richard
    heaved a sigh. "By the breath of my body, Allan," quoth he, "thou hast
    such a wondrous sweet voice that it strangely moves my heart. But what
    doleful ditty is this for the lips of a stout yeoman? I would rather
    hear thee sing a song of love and battle than a sad thing like that.
    Moreover, I understand it not; what meanest thou by the words?"

    "I know not, Your Majesty," said Allan, shaking his head, "for ofttimes
    I sing that which I do not clearly understand mine own self."

    "Well, well," quoth the King, "let it pass; only I tell thee this,
    Allan, thou shouldst turn thy songs to such matters as I spoke of, to
    wit, love or war; for in sooth thou hast a sweeter voice than Blondell,
    and methought he was the best minstrel that ever I heard."

    But now one came forward and said that the feast was ready; so Robin
    Hood brought King Richard and those with him to where it lay all spread
    out on fair white linen cloths which lay upon the soft green grass. Then
    King Richard sat him down and feasted and drank, and when he was done
    he swore roundly that he had never sat at such a lusty repast in all his
    life before.

    That night he lay in Sherwood Forest upon a bed of sweet green
    leaves, and early the next morning he set forth from the woodlands for
    Nottingham Town, Robin Hood and all of his band going with him. You
    may guess what a stir there was in the good town when all these famous
    outlaws came marching into the streets. As for the Sheriff, he knew not
    what to say nor where to look when he saw Robin Hood in such high favor
    with the King, while all his heart was filled with gall because of the
    vexation that lay upon him.

    The next day the King took leave of Nottingham Town; so Robin Hood and
    Little John and Will Scarlet and Allan a Dale shook hands with all the
    rest of the band, kissing the cheeks of each man, and swearing that they
    would often come to Sherwood and see them. Then each mounted his horse
    and rode away in the train of the King.




    Epilogue

    THUS END the Merry Adventures of Robin Hood; for, in spite of his
    promise, it was many a year ere he saw Sherwood again.

    After a year or two at court Little John came back to Nottinghamshire,
    where he lived in an orderly way, though within sight of Sherwood, and
    where he achieved great fame as the champion of all England with the
    quarterstaff. Will Scarlet after a time came back to his own home,
    whence he had been driven by his unlucky killing of his father's
    steward. The rest of the band did their duty as royal rangers right
    well. But Robin Hood and Allan a Dale did not come again to Sherwood so
    quickly, for thus it was:

    Robin, through his great fame as an archer, became a favorite with
    the King, so that he speedily rose in rank to be the chief of all the
    yeomen. At last the King, seeing how faithful and how loyal he was,
    created him Earl of Huntingdon; so Robin followed the King to the
    wars, and found his time so full that he had no chance to come back to
    Sherwood for even so much as a day. As for Allan a Dale and his wife,
    the fair Ellen, they followed Robin Hood and shared in all his ups and
    downs of life.

    And now, dear friend, you who have journeyed with me in all these merry
    doings, I will not bid you follow me further, but will drop your hand
    here with a "good den," if you wish it; for that which cometh hereafter
    speaks of the breaking up of things, and shows how joys and pleasures
    that are dead and gone can never be set upon their feet to walk again.
    I will not dwell upon the matter overlong, but will tell as speedily as
    may be of how that stout fellow, Robin Hood, died as he had lived, not
    at court as Earl of Huntingdon, but with bow in hand, his heart in the
    greenwood, and he himself a right yeoman.

    King Richard died upon the battlefield, in such a way as properly became
    a lion-hearted king, as you yourself, no doubt, know; so, after a
    time, the Earl of Huntingdon - or Robin Hood, as we still call him as of
    old - finding nothing for his doing abroad, came back to merry England
    again. With him came Allan a Dale and his wife, the fair Ellen, for
    these two had been chief of Robin's household ever since he had left
    Sherwood Forest.

    It was in the springtime when they landed once more on the shores of
    England. The leaves were green and the small birds sang blithely, just
    as they used to do in fair Sherwood when Robin Hood roamed the woodland
    shades with a free heart and a light heel. All the sweetness of the time
    and the joyousness of everything brought back to Robin's mind his forest
    life, so that a great longing came upon him to behold the woodlands once
    more. So he went straightway to King John and besought leave of him to
    visit Nottingham for a short season. The King gave him leave to come
    and to go, but bade him not stay longer than three days at Sherwood. So
    Robin Hood and Allan a Dale set forth without delay to Nottinghamshire
    and Sherwood Forest.

    The first night they took up their inn at Nottingham Town, yet they did
    not go to pay their duty to the Sheriff, for his worship bore many a
    bitter grudge against Robin Hood, which grudges had not been lessened
    by Robin's rise in the world. The next day at an early hour they mounted
    their horses and set forth for the woodlands. As they passed along the
    road it seemed to Robin that he knew every stick and stone that his eyes
    looked upon. Yonder was a path that he had ofttimes trod of a mellow
    evening, with Little John beside him; here was one, now nigh choked with
    brambles, along which he and a little band had walked when they went
    forth to seek a certain curtal friar.

    Thus they rode slowly onward, talking about these old, familiar things;
    old and yet new, for they found more in them than they had ever thought
    of before. Thus at last they came to the open glade, and the broad,
    wide-spreading greenwood tree which was their home for so many years.
    Neither of the two spoke when they stood beneath that tree. Robin looked
    all about him at the well-known things, so like what they used to be and
    yet so different; for, where once was the bustle of many busy fellows
    was now the quietness of solitude; and, as he looked, the woodlands, the
    greensward, and the sky all blurred together in his sight through salt
    tears, for such a great yearning came upon him as he looked on these
    things (as well known to him as the fingers of his right hand) that he
    could not keep back the water from his eyes.

    That morning he had slung his good old bugle horn over his shoulder,
    and now, with the yearning, came a great longing to sound his bugle once
    more. He raised it to his lips; he blew a blast. "Tirila, lirila," the
    sweet, clear notes went winding down the forest paths, coming back again
    from the more distant bosky shades in faint echoes of sound, "Tirila,
    lirila, tirila, lirila," until it faded away and was lost.

    Now it chanced that on that very morn Little John was walking through
    a spur of the forest upon certain matters of business, and as he paced
    along, sunk in meditation, the faint, clear notes of a distant bugle
    horn came to his ear. As leaps the stag when it feels the arrow at its
    heart, so leaped Little John when that distant sound met his ear. All
    the blood in his body seemed to rush like a flame into his cheeks as he
    bent his head and listened. Again came the bugle note, thin and clear,
    and yet again it sounded. Then Little John gave a great, wild cry of
    yearning, of joy, and yet of grief, and, putting down his head, he
    dashed into the thicket. Onward he plunged, crackling and rending, as
    the wild boar rushes through the underbrush. Little recked he of thorns
    and briers that scratched his flesh and tore his clothing, for all
    he thought of was to get, by the shortest way, to the greenwood glade
    whence he knew the sound of the bugle horn came. Out he burst from the
    covert, at last, a shower of little broken twigs falling about him, and,
    without pausing a moment, rushed forward and flung himself at Robin's
    feet. Then he clasped his arms around the master's knees, and all his
    body was shaken with great sobs; neither could Robin nor Allan a Dale
    speak, but stood looking down at Little John, the tears rolling down
    their cheeks.

    While they thus stood, seven royal rangers rushed into the open glade
    and raised a great shout of joy at the sight of Robin; and at their
    head was Will Stutely. Then, after a while, came four more, panting with
    their running, and two of these four were Will Scathelock and Midge, the
    Miller; for all of these had heard the sound of Robin Hood's horn. All
    these ran to Robin and kissed his hands and his clothing, with great
    sound of weeping.

    After a while Robin looked around him with tear-dimmed eyes and said,
    in a husky voice, "Now, I swear that never again will I leave these dear
    woodlands. I have been away from them and from you too long. Now do I
    lay by the name of Robert, Earl of Huntingdon, and take upon me once
    again that nobler title, Robin Hood, the Yeoman." At this a great shout
    went up, and all the yeomen shook one another's hands for joy.

    The news that Robin Hood had come back again to dwell in Sherwood as
    of old spread like wildfire all over the countryside, so that ere a
    se'ennight had passed nearly all of his old yeomen had gathered about
    him again. But when the news of all this reached the ears of King John,
    he swore both loud and deep, and took a solemn vow that he would not
    rest until he had Robin Hood in his power, dead or alive. Now there
    was present at court a certain knight, Sir William Dale, as gallant a
    soldier as ever donned harness. Sir William Dale was well acquainted
    with Sherwood Forest, for he was head keeper over that part of it that
    lay nigh to good Mansfield Town; so to him the King turned, and bade him
    take an army of men and go straightway to seek Robin Hood. Likewise the
    King gave Sir William his signet ring to show to the Sheriff, that he
    might raise all his armed men to aid the others in their chase of Robin.
    So Sir William and the Sheriff set forth to do the King's bidding and to
    search for Robin Hood; and for seven days they hunted up and down, yet
    found him not.

    Now, had Robin Hood been as peaceful as of old, everything might have
    ended in smoke, as other such ventures had always done before; but he
    had fought for years under King Richard, and was changed from what he
    used to be. It galled his pride to thus flee away before those sent
    against him, as a chased fox flees from the hounds; so thus it came
    about, at last, that Robin Hood and his yeomen met Sir William and the
    Sheriff and their men in the forest, and a bloody fight followed. The
    first man slain in that fight was the Sheriff of Nottingham, for he fell
    from his horse with an arrow in his brain ere half a score of shafts had
    been sped. Many a better man than the Sheriff kissed the sod that day,
    but at last, Sir William Dale being wounded and most of his men slain,
    he withdrew, beaten, and left the forest. But scores of good fellows
    were left behind him, stretched out all stiff beneath the sweet green
    boughs.

    But though Robin Hood had beaten off his enemies in fair fight, all
    this lay heavily upon his mind, so that he brooded over it until a fever
    seized upon him. For three days it held him, and though he strove to
    fight it off, he was forced to yield at last. Thus it came that, on the
    morning of the fourth day, he called Little John to him, and told him
    that he could not shake the fever from him, and that he would go to his
    cousin, the prioress of the nunnery near Kirklees, in Yorkshire, who was
    a skillful leech, and he would have her open a vein in his arm and take
    a little blood from him, for the bettering of his health. Then he bade
    Little John make ready to go also, for he might perchance need aid in
    his journeying. So Little John and he took their leave of the others,
    and Robin Hood bade Will Stutely be the captain of the band until they
    should come back. Thus they came by easy stages and slow journeying
    until they reached the Nunnery of Kirklees.

    Now Robin had done much to aid this cousin of his; for it was through
    King Richard's love of him that she had been made prioress of the place.
    But there is nought in the world so easily forgot as gratitude; so,
    when the Prioress of Kirklees had heard how her cousin, the Earl of
    Huntingdon, had thrown away his earldom and gone back again to Sherwood,
    she was vexed to the soul, and feared lest her cousinship with him
    should bring the King's wrath upon her also. Thus it happened that when
    Robin came to her and told her how he wished her services as leech, she
    began plotting ill against him in her mind, thinking that by doing evil
    to him she might find favor with his enemies. Nevertheless, she kept
    this well to herself and received Robin with seeming kindness. She led
    him up the winding stone stair to a room which was just beneath the
    eaves of a high, round tower; but she would not let Little John come
    with him.

    So the poor yeoman turned his feet away from the door of the nunnery,
    and left his master in the hands of the women. But, though he did not
    come in, neither did he go far away; for he laid him down in a little
    glade near by, where he could watch the place that Robin abided, like
    some great, faithful dog turned away from the door where his master has
    entered.

    After the women had gotten Robin Hood to the room beneath the eaves, the
    Prioress sent all of the others away; then, taking a little cord, she
    tied it tightly about Robin's arm, as though she were about to bleed
    him. And so she did bleed him, but the vein she opened was not one of
    those that lie close and blue beneath the skin; deeper she cut than
    that, for she opened one of those veins through which the bright red
    blood runs leaping from the heart. Of this Robin knew not; for, though
    he saw the blood flow, it did not come fast enough to make him think
    that there was anything ill in it.

    Having done this vile deed, the Prioress turned and left her cousin,
    locking the door behind her. All that livelong day the blood ran from
    Robin Hood's arm, nor could he check it, though he strove in every way
    to do so. Again and again he called for help, but no help came, for his
    cousin had betrayed him, and Little John was too far away to hear his
    voice. So he bled and bled until he felt his strength slipping away from
    him. Then he arose, tottering, and bearing himself up by the palms of
    his hands against the wall, he reached his bugle horn at last. Thrice
    he sounded it, but weakly and faintly, for his breath was fluttering
    through sickness and loss of strength; nevertheless, Little John heard
    it where he lay in the glade, and, with a heart all sick with dread, he
    came running and leaping toward the nunnery. Loudly he knocked at the
    door, and in a loud voice shouted for them to let him in, but the door
    was of massive oak, strongly barred, and studded with spikes, so they
    felt safe, and bade Little John begone.

    Then Little John's heart was mad with grief and fear for his master's
    life. Wildly he looked about him, and his sight fell upon a heavy stone
    mortar, such as three men could not lift nowadays. Little John took
    three steps forward, and, bending his back, heaved the stone mortar up
    from where it stood deeply rooted. Staggering under its weight, he came
    forward and hurled it crashing against the door. In burst the door, and
    away fled the frightened nuns, shrieking, at his coming. Then Little
    John strode in, and never a word said he, but up the winding stone steps
    he ran till he reached the room wherein his master was. Here he found
    the door locked also, but, putting his shoulder against it, he burst the
    locks as though they were made of brittle ice.

    There he saw his own dear master leaning against the gray stone wall,
    his face all white and drawn, and his head swaying to and fro with
    weakness. Then, with a great, wild cry of love and grief and pity,
    Little John leaped forward and caught Robin Hood in his arms. Up he
    lifted him as a mother lifts her child, and carrying him to the bed,
    laid him tenderly thereon.

    And now the Prioress came in hastily, for she was frightened at what she
    had done, and dreaded the vengeance of Little John and the others of the
    band; then she stanched the blood by cunning bandages, so that it flowed
    no more. All the while Little John stood grimly by, and after she had
    done he sternly bade her to begone, and she obeyed, pale and trembling.
    Then, after she had departed, Little John spake cheering words, laughing
    loudly, and saying that all this was a child's fright, and that no stout
    yeoman would die at the loss of a few drops of blood. "Why," quoth he,
    "give thee a se'ennight and thou wilt be roaming the woodlands as boldly
    as ever."

    But Robin shook his head and smiled faintly where he lay. "Mine own dear
    Little John," whispered he, "Heaven bless thy kind, rough heart. But,
    dear friend, we will never roam the woodlands together again."

    "Ay, but we will!" quoth Little John loudly. "I say again, ay - out upon
    it - who dares say that any more harm shall come upon thee? Am I not by?
    Let me see who dares touch - " Here he stopped of a sudden, for his words
    choked him. At last he said, in a deep, husky voice, "Now, if aught of
    harm befalls thee because of this day's doings, I swear by Saint George
    that the red cock shall crow over the rooftree of this house, for the
    hot flames shall lick every crack and cranny thereof. As for these
    women" - here he ground his teeth - "it will be an ill day for them!"

    But Robin Hood took Little John's rough, brown fist in his white hands,
    and chid him softly in his low, weak voice, asking him since what time
    Little John had thought of doing harm to women, even in vengeance. Thus
    he talked till, at last, the other promised, in a choking voice, that no
    ill should fall upon the place, no matter what happened. Then a silence
    fell, and Little John sat with Robin Hood's hand in his, gazing out of
    the open window, ever and anon swallowing a great lump that came in his
    throat. Meantime the sun dropped slowly to the west, till all the sky
    was ablaze with a red glory. Then Robin Hood, in a weak, faltering
    voice, bade Little John raise him that he might look out once more upon
    the woodlands; so the yeoman lifted him in his arms, as he bade, and
    Robin Hood's head lay on his friend's shoulder. Long he gazed, with a
    wide, lingering look, while the other sat with bowed head, the hot tears
    rolling one after another from his eyes, and dripping upon his bosom,
    for he felt that the time of parting was near at hand. Then, presently,
    Robin Hood bade him string his stout bow for him, and choose a smooth
    fair arrow from his quiver. This Little John did, though without
    disturbing his master or rising from where he sat. Robin Hood's fingers
    wrapped lovingly around his good bow, and he smiled faintly when he felt
    it in his grasp, then he nocked the arrow on that part of the string
    that the tips of his fingers knew so well. "Little John," said he,
    "Little John, mine own dear friend, and him I love better than all
    others in the world, mark, I prythee, where this arrow lodges, and there
    let my grave be digged. Lay me with my face toward the East, Little
    John, and see that my resting place be kept green, and that my weary
    bones be not disturbed."

    As he finished speaking, he raised himself of a sudden and sat upright.
    His old strength seemed to come back to him, and, drawing the bowstring
    to his ear, he sped the arrow out of the open casement. As the shaft
    flew, his hand sank slowly with the bow till it lay across his knees,
    and his body likewise sank back again into Little John's loving arms;
    but something had sped from that body, even as the winged arrow sped
    from the bow.

    For some minutes Little John sat motionless, but presently he laid that
    which he held gently down, then, folding the hands upon the breast and
    covering up the face, he turned upon his heel and left the room without
    a word or a sound.

    Upon the steep stairway he met the Prioress and some of the chief among
    the sisters. To them he spoke in a deep, quivering voice, and said he,
    "An ye go within a score of feet of yonder room, I will tear down
    your rookery over your heads so that not one stone shall be left upon
    another. Bear my words well in mind, for I mean them." So saying, he
    turned and left them, and they presently saw him running rapidly across
    the open, through the falling of the dusk, until he was swallowed up by
    the forest.

    The early gray of the coming morn was just beginning to lighten the
    black sky toward the eastward when Little John and six more of the band
    came rapidly across the open toward the nunnery. They saw no one, for
    the sisters were all hidden away from sight, having been frightened by
    Little John's words. Up the stone stair they ran, and a great sound of
    weeping was presently heard. After a while this ceased, and then came
    the scuffling and shuffling of men's feet as they carried a heavy weight
    down the steep and winding stairs. So they went forth from the nunnery,
    and, as they passed through the doors thereof, a great, loud sound of
    wailing arose from the glade that lay all dark in the dawning, as though
    many men, hidden in the shadows, had lifted up their voices in sorrow.

    Thus died Robin Hood, at Kirklees Nunnery, in fair Yorkshire, with mercy
    in his heart toward those that had been his undoing; for thus he showed
    mercy for the erring and pity for the weak through all the time of his
    living.

    His yeomen were scattered henceforth, but no great ill befell them
    thereafter, for a more merciful sheriff and one who knew them not so
    well succeeding the one that had gone, and they being separated here and
    there throughout the countryside, they abided in peace and quietness,
    so that many lived to hand down these tales to their children and their
    children's children.

    A certain one sayeth that upon a stone at Kirklees is an old
    inscription. This I give in the ancient English in which it was written,
    and thus it runs:

    HEAR UNDERNEAD DIS LAITL STEAN LAIS ROBERT EARL OF HUNTINGTUN NEA ARCIR
    VER AS HIE SAE GEUD AN PIPL KAULD IM ROBIN HEUD SICK UTLAWS AS HI AN IS
    MEN VIL ENGLAND NIDIR SI AGEN OBIIT 24 KAL. DEKEMBRIS 1247.


    And now, dear friend, we also must part, for our merry journeyings have
    ended, and here, at the grave of Robin Hood, we turn, each going his own
    way.
  </content>
</note>
CREATE
<note>
  <guid>99BAAAA6-3F35-4551-AF97-C4C1D009594A</guid>
  <created>2014-02-14T19:26:08Z</created>
  <tag>fiction</tag>
  <tag>novel</tag>
  <tag>arthur</tag>
  <tag>knight</tag>
  <tag>knowles</tag>
  <tag>king</tag>
  <content>
    The Legends of KING ARTHUR and his KNIGHTS

    Sir James Knowles

    Illustrated by Lancelot Speed


    TO
    ALFRED TENNYSON, D.C.L.
    POET LAUREATE

    THIS ATTEMPT AT A POPULAR VERSION OF
    THE ARTHUR LEGENDS
    IS BY HIS PERMISSION DEDICATED
    AS A TRIBUTE
    OF THE SINCEREST AND WARMEST RESPECT


    1862




    PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION


    The Publishers have asked me to authorise a new edition, in my own name,
    of this little book - now long out of print - which was written by me
    thirty-five years ago under the initials J.T.K.

    In acceding to their request I wish to say that the book as now published
    is merely a word-for-word reprint of my early effort to help to popularise
    the Arthur legends.

    It is little else than an abridgment of Sir Thomas Malory's version of
    them as printed by Caxton - with a few additions from Geoffrey of Monmouth
    and other sources - and an endeavour to arrange the many tales into a more
    or less consecutive story.

    The chief pleasure which came to me from it was, and is, that it began for
    me a long and intimate acquaintance with Lord Tennyson, to whom, by his
    permission, I Dedicated it before I was personally known to him.

    JAMES KNOWLES.




    _Addendum by Lady Knowles_


    In response to a widely expressed wish for a fresh edition of this little
    book - now for some years out of print - a new and ninth edition has been
    prepared.

    In his preface my husband says that the intimacy with Lord Tennyson to
    which it led was the chief pleasure the book brought him. I have been
    asked to furnish a few more particulars on this point that may be
    generally interesting, and feel that I cannot do better than give some
    extracts from a letter written by himself to a friend in July 1896.

    "DEAR  -  - ,

    "I am so _very_ glad you approve of my little effort to popularise the
    Arthur Legends. Tennyson had written his first four 'Idylls of the King'
    before my book appeared, which was in 1861. Indeed, it was in consequence
    of the first four Idylls that I sought and obtained, while yet a stranger
    to him, leave to dedicate my venture to him. He was extremely kind about
    it - declared 'it ought to go through forty editions' - and when I came to
    know him personally talked very frequently about it and Arthur with me,
    and made constant use of it when he at length yielded to my perpetual
    urgency and took up again his forsaken project of treating the whole
    subject of King Arthur.

    "He discussed and rediscussed at any amount of length the way in which
    this could now be done - and the Symbolism, which had from his earliest
    time haunted him as the inner meaning to be given to it, brought him back
    to the Poem in its changed shape of separate pictures.

    "He used often to say that it was entirely my doing that he revived his
    old plan, and added, 'I know more about Arthur than any other man in
    England, and I think you know next most.' It would amuse you to see in
    what intimate detail he used to consult with me - and often with my little
    book in front of us - over the various tales, and when I wrote an article
    (in the shape of a long letter) in the _Spectator_ of January 1870 he
    asked to reprint it, and published it with the collected Idylls.

    "For years, while his boys were at school and college, I acted as his
    confidential friend in business and many other matters, and I suppose he
    told me more about himself and his life than any other man now living
    knows."

    ISABEL KNOWLES.




    CONTENTS


    CHAPTER I

    The Finding of Merlin - The Fight of the Dragons - The Giants' Dance - The
    Prophecies of Merlin and the Birth of Arthur - Uther attacks the
    Saxons - The Death of Uther

    CHAPTER II

    Merlin's Advice to the Archbishop - The Miracle of the Sword and Stone - The
    Coronation of King Arthur - The Opposition of the Six Kings - The Sword
    Excalibur - The Defeat of the Six Kings - The War with the Eleven Kings

    CHAPTER III

    The Adventure of the Questing Beast - The Siege of York - The Battles of
    Celidon Forest and Badon Hill - King Arthur drives the Saxons from the
    Realm - The Embassy from Rome - The King rescues Merlin - The Knight of the
    Fountain

    CHAPTER IV

    King Arthur conquers Ireland and Norway - Slays the Giant of St. Michael's
    Mount and conquers Gaul - King Ryence's Insolent Message - The Damsel and
    the Sword - The Lady of the Lake - The Adventures of Sir Balin

    CHAPTER V

    Sir Balin kills Sir Lancear - The Sullen Knight - The Knight Invisible is
    killed - Sir Balin smites the Dolorous Stroke, and fights with his brother
    Sir Balan

    CHAPTER VI

    The Marriage of King Arthur and Guinevere - The Coronation of the
    Queen - The Founding of the Round Table - The Quest of the White Hart - The
    Adventures of Sir Gawain - The Quest of the White Hound - Sir Tor kills
    Abellius - The Adventures of Sir Pellinore - The Death of Sir
    Hantzlake - Merlin saves King Arthur

    CHAPTER VII

    King Arthur and Sir Accolon of Gaul are entrapped by Sir Damas - They fight
    each other through Enchantment of Queen Morgan le Fay - Sir Damas is
    compelled to surrender all his Lands to Sir Outzlake his Brother their
    Rightful Owner - Queen Morgan essays to kill King Arthur with a Magic
    Garment - Her Damsel is compelled to wear it and is thereby burned to
    Cinders

    CHAPTER VIII

    A Second Embassy from Rome - King Arthur's Answer - The Emperor assembles
    his Armies - King Arthur slays the Emperor - Sir Gawain and Sir
    Prianius - The Lombards are defeated - King Arthur crowned at Rome

    CHAPTER IX

    The Adventures of Sir Lancelot - He and his Cousin Sir Lionel set
    forth - The Four Witch-Queens - King Bagdemagus - Sir Lancelot slays Sir
    Turquine and delivers his Captive Knights - The Foul Knight - Sir Gaunter
    attacks Sir Lancelot - The Four Knights - Sir Lancelot comes to the Chapel
    Perilous - Ellawes the Sorceress - The Lady and the Falcon - Sir Bedivere and
    the Dead Lady

    CHAPTER X

    Beaumains is made a Kitchen Page by Sir Key - He claims the Adventure of
    the Damsel Linet - He fights with Sir Lancelot and is knighted by him in
    his True Name of Gareth - Is flouted by the Damsel Linet - But overthrows
    all Knights he meets and sends them to King Arthur's Court - He delivers
    the Lady Lyones from the Knight of the Redlands - The Tournament before
    Castle Perilous - Marriage of Sir Gareth and the Lady Lyones

    CHAPTER XI

    The Adventures of Sir Tristram - His Stepmother - He is knighted - Fights
    with Sir Marhaus - Sir Palomedes and La Belle Isault - Sir Bleoberis and Sir
    Segwarides - Sir Tristram's Quest - His Return - The Castle Pluere - Sir
    Brewnor is slain - Sir Kay Hedius - La Belle Isault's Hound - Sir Dinedan
    refuses to fight - Sir Pellinore follows Sir Tristram - Sir
    Brewse-without-pity - The Tournament at the Maiden's Castle - Sir Palomedes
    and Sir Tristram

    CHAPTER XII

    Merlin is bewitched by a Damsel of the Lady of the Lake - Galahad knighted
    by Sir Lancelot - The Perilous Seat - The Marvellous Sword - Sir Galahad in
    the Perilous Seat - The Sangreal - The Knights vow themselves to its
    Quest - The Shield of the White Knight - The Fiend of the Tomb - Sir Galahad
    at the Maiden's Castle - The Sick Knight and the Sangreal - Sir Lancelot
    declared unworthy to find the Holy Vessel - Sir Percival seeks Sir
    Galahad - The Black Steed - Sir Bors and the Hermit - Sir Pridan le Noir - Sir
    Lionel's Anger - He meets Sir Percival - The ship "Faith" - Sir Galahad and
    Earl Hernox - The Leprous Lady - Sir Galahad discloses himself to Sir
    Lancelot - They part - The Blind King Evelake - Sir Galahad finds the
    Sangreal - His Death

    CHAPTER XIII

    The Queen quarrels with Sir Lancelot - She is accused of Murder - Her
    Champion proves her innocence - The Tourney at Camelot - Sir Lancelot in the
    Tourney - Sir Baldwin the Knight-Hermit - Elaine, the Maid of Astolat, seeks
    for Sir Lancelot - She tends his Wounds - Her Death - The Queen and Sir
    Lancelot are reconciled

    CHAPTER XIV

    Sir Lancelot attacked by Sir Agravaine, Sir Modred, and thirteen other
    Knights - He slays them all but Sir Modred - He leaves the Court - Sir Modred
    accuses him to the King - The Queen condemned to be burnt - Her rescue by
    Sir Lancelot and flight with him - The War between Sir Lancelot and the
    King - The Enmity of Sir Gawain - The Usurpation of Sir Modred - The Queen
    retires to a Nunnery - Sir Lancelot goes on Pilgrimage - The Battle of
    Barham Downs - Sir Bedivere and the Sword Excalibur - The Death of King
    Arthur




    ILLUSTRATOR'S NOTE


    Of scenes from the Legends of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round
    Table many lovely pictures have been painted, showing much diversity of
    figures and surroundings, some being definitely sixth-century British or
    Saxon, as in Blair Leighton's fine painting of the dead Elaine;
    others - for example, Watts' Sir Galahad - show knight and charger in
    fifteenth-century armour; while the warriors of Burne Jones wear strangely
    impracticable armour of some mystic period. Each of these painters was
    free to follow his own conception, putting the figures into whatever
    period most appealed to his imagination; for he was not illustrating the
    actual tales written by Sir Thomas Malory, otherwise he would have found
    himself face to face with a difficulty.

    King Arthur and his knights fought, endured, and toiled in the sixth
    century, when the Saxons were overrunning Britain; but their achievements
    were not chronicled by Sir Thomas Malory until late in the fifteenth
    century.

    Sir Thomas, as Froissart has done before him, described the habits of
    life, the dresses, weapons, and armour that his own eyes looked upon in
    the every-day scenes about him, regardless of the fact that almost every
    detail mentioned was something like a thousand years too late.

    Had Malory undertaken an account of the landing of Julius Caesar he would,
    as a matter of course, have protected the Roman legions with bascinet or
    salade, breastplate, pauldron and palette, coudiere, taces and the rest,
    and have armed them with lance and shield, jewel-hilted sword and slim
    misericorde; while the Emperor himself might have been given the very suit
    of armour stripped from the Duke of Clarence before his fateful encounter
    with the butt of malmsey.

    Did not even Shakespeare calmly give cannon to the Romans and suppose
    every continental city to lie majestically beside the sea? By the old
    writers, accuracy in these matters was disregarded, and anachronisms were
    not so much tolerated as unperceived.

    In illustrating this edition of "The Legends of King Arthur and his
    Knights," it has seemed best, and indeed unavoidable if the text and the
    pictures are to tally, to draw what Malory describes, to place the fashion
    of the costumes and armour somewhere about A.D. 1460, and to arm the
    knights in accordance with the Tabard Period.

    LANCELOT SPEED.




    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


    The Marriage of King Arthur

    Then fell Sir Ector down upon his knees upon the ground before young
    Arthur, and Sir Key also with him.

    The Lady of the Lake

    The giant sat at supper, gnawing on a limb of a man, and baking his huge
    frame by the fire

    The castle rocked and rove throughout, and all the walls fell crashed and
    breaking to the earth

    Came forth twelve fair damsels, and saluted King Arthur by his name

    Prianius was christened, and made a duke and knight of the Round Table

    Sir Lancelot smote down with one spear five knights, and brake the backs
    of four, and cast down the King of Northgales

    Beyond the chapel, he met a fair damsel, who said, "Sir Lancelot, leave
    that sword behind thee, or thou diest"

    "Lady," replied Sir Beaumains, "a knight is little worth who may not bear
    with a damsel"

    So he rode into the hall and alighted

    Then they began the battle, and tilted at their hardest against each other

    And running to her chamber, she sought in her casket for the piece of
    iron ... and fitted it in Tristram's sword

    By the time they had finished drinking they loved each other so well that
    their love never more might leave them

    Waving her hands and muttering the charm, and presently enclosed him fast
    within the tree

    Galahad ... quickly lifted up the stone, and forthwith came out a foul
    smoke

    "This girdle, lords," said she, "is made for the most part of mine own
    hair, which, while I was yet in the world, I loved full well"

    At last the strange knight smote him to the earth, and gave him such a
    buffet on the helm as wellnigh killed him

    Then was Sir Lancelot sent for, and the letter read aloud by a clerk

    But still the knights cried mightily without the door, "Traitor, come
    forth!"




    THE LEGENDS OF KING ARTHUR




    CHAPTER I

    _The Prophecies of Merlin, and the Birth of Arthur_


    King Vortigern the usurper sat upon his throne in London, when, suddenly,
    upon a certain day, ran in a breathless messenger, and cried aloud -

    "Arise, Lord King, for the enemy is come; even Ambrosius and Uther, upon
    whose throne thou sittest - and full twenty thousand with them - and they
    have sworn by a great oath, Lord, to slay thee, ere this year be done; and
    even now they march towards thee as the north wind of winter for
    bitterness and haste."

    At those words Vortigern's face grew white as ashes, and, rising in
    confusion and disorder, he sent for all the best artificers and craftsmen
    and mechanics, and commanded them vehemently to go and build him
    straightway in the furthest west of his lands a great and strong castle,
    where he might fly for refuge and escape the vengeance of his master's
    sons - "and, moreover," cried he, "let the work be done within a hundred
    days from now, or I will surely spare no life amongst you all."

    Then all the host of craftsmen, fearing for their lives, found out a
    proper site whereon to build the tower, and eagerly began to lay in the
    foundations. But no sooner were the walls raised up above the ground than
    all their work was overwhelmed and broken down by night invisibly, no man
    perceiving how, or by whom, or what. And the same thing happening again,
    and yet again, all the workmen, full of terror, sought out the king, and
    threw themselves upon their faces before him, beseeching him to interfere
    and help them or to deliver them from their dreadful work.

    Filled with mixed rage and fear, the king called for the astrologers and
    wizards, and took counsel with them what these things might be, and how to
    overcome them. The wizards worked their spells and incantations, and in
    the end declared that nothing but the blood of a youth born without mortal
    father, smeared on the foundations of the castle, could avail to make it
    stand. Messengers were therefore sent forthwith through all the land to
    find, if it were possible, such a child. And, as some of them went down a
    certain village street, they saw a band of lads fighting and quarrelling,
    and heard them shout at one - "Avaunt, thou imp! - avaunt! Son of no mortal
    man! go, find thy father, and leave us in peace."

    At that the messengers looked steadfastly on the lad, and asked who he
    was. One said his name was Merlin; another, that his birth and parentage
    were known by no man; a third, that the foul fiend alone was his father.
    Hearing the things, the officers seized Merlin, and carried him before the
    king by force.

    But no sooner was he brought to him than he asked in a loud voice, for
    what cause he was thus dragged there?

    "My magicians," answered Vortigern, "told me to seek out a man that had no
    human father, and to sprinkle my castle with his blood, that it may
    stand."

    "Order those magicians," said Merlin, "to come before me, and I will
    convict them of a lie."

    The king was astonished at his words, but commanded the magicians to come
    and sit down before Merlin, who cried to them -

    "Because ye know not what it is that hinders the foundation of the castle,
    ye have advised my blood for a cement to it, as if that would avail; but
    tell me now rather what there is below that ground, for something there is
    surely underneath that will not suffer the tower to stand?"

    The wizards at these words began to fear, and made no answer. Then said
    Merlin to the king -

    "I pray, Lord, that workmen may be ordered to dig deep down into the
    ground till they shall come to a great pool of water."

    This then was done, and the pool discovered far beneath the surface of the
    ground.

    Then, turning again to the magicians, Merlin said, "Tell me now, false
    sycophants, what there is underneath that pool?" - but they were silent.
    Then said he to the king, "Command this pool to be drained, and at the
    bottom shall be found two dragons, great and huge, which now are sleeping,
    but which at night awake and fight and tear each other. At their great
    struggle all the ground shakes and trembles, and so casts down thy towers,
    which, therefore, never yet could find secure foundations."

    The king was amazed at these words, but commanded the pool to be forthwith
    drained; and surely at the bottom of it did they presently discover the
    two dragons, fast asleep, as Merlin had declared.

    But Vortigern sat upon the brink of the pool till night to see what else
    would happen.

    Then those two dragons, one of which was white, the other red, rose up and
    came near one another, and began a sore fight, and cast forth fire with
    their breath. But the white dragon had the advantage, and chased the other
    to the end of the lake. And he, for grief at his flight, turned back upon
    his foe, and renewed the combat, and forced him to retire in turn. But in
    the end the red dragon was worsted, and the white dragon disappeared no
    man knew where.

    When their battle was done, the king desired Merlin to tell him what it
    meant. Whereat he, bursting into tears, cried out this prophecy, which
    first foretold the coming of King Arthur.

    "Woe to the red dragon, which figureth the British nation, for his
    banishment cometh quickly; his lurkingholes shall be seized by the white
    dragon - the Saxon whom thou, O king, hast called to the land. The
    mountains shall be levelled as the valleys, and the rivers of the valleys
    shall run blood; cities shall be burned, and churches laid in ruins; till
    at length the oppressed shall turn for a season and prevail against the
    strangers. For a Boar of Cornwall shall arise and rend them, and trample
    their necks beneath his feet. The island shall be subject to his power,
    and he shall take the forests of Gaul. The house of Romulus shall dread
    him - all the world shall fear him - and his end shall no man know; he shall
    be immortal in the mouths of the people, and his works shall be food to
    those that tell them.

    "But as for thee, O Vortigern, flee thou the sons of Constantine, for they
    shall burn thee in thy tower. For thine own ruin wast thou traitor to
    their father, and didst bring the Saxon heathens to the land. Aurelius and
    Uther are even now upon thee to revenge their father's murder; and the
    brood of the white dragon shall waste thy country, and shall lick thy
    blood. Find out some refuge, if thou wilt! but who may escape the doom of
    God?"

    The king heard all this, trembling greatly; and, convicted of his sins,
    said nothing in reply. Only he hasted the builders of his tower by day and
    night, and rested not till he had fled thereto.

    In the meantime, Aurelius, the rightful king, was hailed with joy by the
    Britons, who flocked to his standard, and prayed to be led against the
    Saxons. But he, till he had first killed Vortigern, would begin no other
    war. He marched therefore to Cambria, and came before the tower which the
    usurper had built. Then, crying out to all his knights, "Avenge ye on him
    who hath ruined Britain and slain my father and your king!" he rushed with
    many thousands at the castle walls. But, being driven back again and yet
    again, at length he thought of fire, and ordered blazing brands to be cast
    into the building from all sides. These finding soon a proper fuel, ceased
    not to rage, till spreading to a mighty conflagration, they burned down
    the tower and Vortigern within it.

    Then did Aurelius turn his strength against Hengist and the Saxons, and,
    defeating them in many places, weakened their power for a long season, so
    that the land had peace.

    Anon the king, making many journeys to and fro, restoring ruined churches
    and, creating order, came to the monastery near Salisbury, where all those
    British knights lay buried who had been slain there by the treachery of
    Hengist. For when in former times Hengist had made a solemn truce with
    Vortigern, to meet in peace and settle terms, whereby himself and all his
    Saxons should depart from Britain, the Saxon soldiers carried every one of
    them beneath his garment a long dagger, and, at a given signal, fell upon
    the Britons, and slew them, to the number of nearly five hundred.

    The sight of the place where the dead lay moved Aurelius to great sorrow,
    and he cast about in his mind how to make a worthy tomb over so many noble
    martyrs, who had died there for their country.

    When he had in vain consulted many craftsmen and builders, he sent, by the
    advice of the archbishop, for Merlin, and asked him what to do. "If you
    would honour the burying-place of these men," said Merlin, "with an
    everlasting monument, send for the Giants' Dance which is in Killaraus, a
    mountain in Ireland; for there is a structure of stone there which none of
    this age could raise without a perfect knowledge of the arts. They are
    stones of a vast size and wondrous nature, and if they can be placed here
    as they are there, round this spot of ground, they will stand for ever."

    At these words of Merlin, Aurelius burst into laughter, and said, "How is
    it possible to remove such vast stones from so great a distance, as if
    Britain, also, had no stones fit for the work?"

    "I pray the king," said Merlin, "to forbear vain laughter; what I have
    said is true, for those stones are mystical and have healing virtues. The
    giants of old brought them from the furthest coast of Africa, and placed
    them in Ireland while they lived in that country: and their design was to
    make baths in them, for use in time of grievous illness. For if they
    washed the stones and put the sick into the water, it certainly healed
    them, as also it did them that were wounded in battle; and there is no
    stone among them but hath the same virtue still."

    When the Britons heard this, they resolved to send for the stones, and to
    make war upon the people of Ireland if they offered to withhold them. So,
    when they had chosen Uther the king's brother for their chief, they set
    sail, to the number of 15,000 men, and came to Ireland. There Gillomanius,
    the king, withstood them fiercely, and not till after a great battle could
    they approach the Giants' Dance, the sight of which filled them with joy
    and admiration. But when they sought to move the stones, the strength of
    all the army was in vain, until Merlin, laughing at their failures,
    contrived machines of wondrous cunning, which took them down with ease,
    and placed them in the ships.

    When they had brought the whole to Salisbury, Aurelius, with the crown
    upon his head, kept for four days the feast of Pentecost with royal pomp;
    and in the midst of all the clergy and the people, Merlin raised up the
    stones, and set them round the sepulchre of the knights and barons, as
    they stood in the mountains of Ireland.

    Then was the monument called "Stonehenge," which stands, as all men know,
    upon the plain of Salisbury to this very day.

    Soon thereafter it befell that Aurelius was slain by poison at Winchester,
    and was himself buried within the Giants' Dance.

    At the same time came forth a comet of amazing size and brightness,
    darting out a beam, at the end whereof was a cloud of fire shaped like a
    dragon, from whose mouth went out two rays, one stretching over Gaul, the
    other ending in seven lesser rays over the Irish sea.

    At the appearance of this star a great dread fell upon the people, and
    Uther, marching into Cambria against the son of Vortigern, himself was
    very troubled to learn what it might mean. Then Merlin, being called
    before him, cried with a loud voice: "O mighty loss! O stricken Britain!
    Alas! the great prince is gone from us. Aurelius Ambrosius is dead, whose
    death will be ours also, unless God help us. Haste, therefore, noble
    Uther, to destroy the enemy; the victory shall be thine, and thou shalt be
    king of all Britain. For the star with the fiery dragon signifies thyself;
    and the ray over Gaul portends that thou shalt have a son, most mighty,
    whom all those kingdoms shall obey which the ray covers."

    Thus, for the second time, did Merlin foretell the coming of King Arthur.
    And Uther, when he was made king, remembered Merlin's words, and caused
    two dragons to be made in gold, in likeness of the dragon he had seen in
    the star. One of these he gave to Winchester Cathedral, and had the other
    carried into all his wars before him, whence he was ever after called
    Uther Pendragon, or the dragon's head.

    Now, when Uther Pendragon had passed through all the land, and settled
    it - and even voyaged into all the countries of the Scots, and tamed the
    fierceness of that rebel people - he came to London, and ministered justice
    there. And it befell at a certain great banquet and high feast which the
    king made at Easter-tide, there came, with many other earls and barons,
    Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, and his wife Igerna, who was the most famous
    beauty in all Britain. And soon thereafter, Gorlois being slain in battle,
    Uther determined to make Igerna his own wife. But in order to do this, and
    enable him to come to her - for she was shut up in the high castle of
    Tintagil, on the furthest coast of Cornwall - the king sent for Merlin, to
    take counsel with him and to pray his help. This, therefore, Merlin
    promised him on one condition - namely, that the king should give him up
    the first son born of the marriage. For Merlin by his arts foreknew that
    this firstborn should be the long-wished prince, King Arthur.

    When Uther, therefore, was at length happily wedded, Merlin came to the
    castle on a certain day, and said, "Sir, thou must now provide thee for
    the nourishing of thy child."

    And the king, nothing doubting, said, "Be it as thou wilt."

    "I know a lord of thine in this land," said Merlin, "who is a man both
    true and faithful; let him have the nourishing of the child. His name is
    Sir Ector, and he hath fair possessions both in England and in Wales.
    When, therefore, the child is born, let him be delivered unto me,
    unchristened, at yonder postern-gate, and I will bestow him in the care of
    this good knight."

    So when the child was born, the king bid two knights and two ladies to
    take it, bound in rich cloth of gold, and deliver it to a poor man whom
    they should discover at the postern-gate. And the child being delivered
    thus to Merlin, who himself took the guise of a poor man, was carried by
    him to a holy priest and christened by the name of Arthur, and then was
    taken to Sir Ector's house, and nourished at Sir Ector's wife's own
    breasts. And in the same house he remained privily for many years, no man
    soever knowing where he was, save Merlin and the king.

    Anon it befell that the king was seized by a lingering distemper, and the
    Saxon heathens, taking their occasion, came back from over sea, and
    swarmed upon the land, wasting it with fire and sword. When Uther heard
    thereof, he fell into a greater rage than his weakness could bear, and
    commanded all his nobles to come before him, that he might upbraid them
    for their cowardice. And when he had sharply and hotly rebuked them, he
    swore that he himself, nigh unto death although he lay, would lead them
    forth against the enemy. Then causing a horse-litter to be made, in which
    he might be carried - for he was too faint and weak to ride - he went up
    with all his army swiftly against the Saxons.

    But they, when they heard that Uther was coming in a litter, disdained to
    fight with him, saying it would be shame for brave men to fight with one
    half dead. So they retired into their city; and, as it were in scorn of
    danger, left the gates wide open. But Uther straightway commanding his men
    to assault the town, they did so without loss of time, and had already
    reached the gates, when the Saxons, repenting too late of their haughty
    pride, rushed forth to the defence. The battle raged till night, and was
    begun again next day; but at last, their leaders, Octa and Eosa, being
    slain, the Saxons turned their backs and fled, leaving the Britons a full
    triumph.

    The king at this felt so great joy, that, whereas before he could scarce
    raise himself without help, he now sat upright in his litter by himself,
    and said, with a laughing and merry face, "They called me the half-dead
    king, and so indeed I was; but victory to me half dead is better than
    defeat and the best health. For to die with honour is far better than to
    live disgraced."

    But the Saxons, although thus defeated, were ready still for war. Uther
    would have pursued them; but his illness had by now so grown, that his
    knights and barons kept him from the adventure. Whereat the enemy took
    courage, and left nothing undone to destroy the land; until, descending to
    the vilest treachery, they resolved to kill the king by poison.

    To this end, as he lay sick at Verulam, they sent and poisoned stealthily
    a spring of clear water, whence he was wont to drink daily; and so, on the
    very next day, he was taken with the pains of death, as were also a
    hundred others after him, before the villainy was discovered, and heaps of
    earth thrown over the well.

    The knights and barons, full of sorrow, now took counsel together, and
    came to Merlin for his help to learn the king's will before he died, for
    he was by this time speechless. "Sirs, there is no remedy," said Merlin,
    "and God's will must be done; but be ye all to-morrow before him, for God
    will make him speak before he die."

    So on the morrow all the barons, with Merlin, stood round the bedside of
    the king; and Merlin said aloud to Uther, "Lord, shall thy son Arthur be
    the king of all this realm after thy days?"

    Then Uther Pendragon turned him about, and said, in the hearing of them
    all, "God's blessing and mine be upon him. I bid him pray for my soul, and
    also that he claim my crown, or forfeit all my blessing;" and with those
    words he died.

    Then came together all the bishops and the clergy, and great multitudes of
    people, and bewailed the king; and carrying his body to the convent of
    Ambrius, they buried it close by his brother's grave, within the "Giants'
    Dance."




    CHAPTER II

    _The Miracle of the Sword and Stone, and the Coronation of King
    Arthur - The Sword Excalilur - The War with the Eleven Kings_


    Now Arthur the prince had all this time been nourished in Sir Ector's
    house as his own son, and was fair and tall and comely, being of the age
    of fifteen years, great in strength, gentle in manner, and accomplished in
    all exercises proper for the training of a knight.

    But as yet he knew not of his father; for Merlin had so dealt, that none
    save Uther and himself knew aught about him. Wherefore it befell, that
    many of the knights and barons who heard King Uther speak before his
    death, and call his son Arthur his successor, were in great amazement; and
    some doubted, and others were displeased.

    Anon the chief lords and princes set forth each to his own land, and,
    raising armed men and multitudes of followers, determined every one to
    gain the crown for himself; for they said in their hearts, "If there be
    any such a son at all as he of whom this wizard forced the king to speak,
    who are we that a beardless boy should have rule over us?"

    So the land stood long in great peril, for every lord and baron sought but
    his own advantage; and the Saxons, growing ever more adventurous, wasted
    and overran the towns and villages in every part.

    Then Merlin went to Brice, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and advised him
    to require all the earls and barons of the realm and all knights and
    gentlemen-at-arms to come to him at London, before Christmas, under pain
    of cursing, that they might learn the will of Heaven who should be king.
    This, therefore, the archbishop did, and upon Christmas Eve were met
    together in London all the greatest princes, lords, and barons; and long
    before day they prayed in St. Paul's Church, and the archbishop besought
    Heaven for a sign who should be lawful king of all the realm.

    And as they prayed, there was seen in the churchyard, set straight before
    the doorways of the church, a huge square stone having a naked sword stuck
    in the midst of it. And on the sword was written in letters of gold,
    "Whoso pulleth out the sword from this stone is born the rightful King of
    Britain."

    At this all the people wondered greatly; and, when Mass was over, the
    nobles, knights, and princes ran out eagerly from the church to see the
    stone and sword; and a law was forthwith made that whoso should pull out
    the sword should be acknowledged straightway King of Britain.

    Then many knights and barons pulled at the sword with all their might, and
    some of them tried many times, but none could stir or move it.

    When all had tried in vain, the archbishop declared the man whom Heaven
    had chosen was not yet there. "But God," said he, "will doubtless make
    him known ere many days."

    So ten knights were chosen, being men of high renown, to watch and keep
    the sword; and there was proclamation made through all the land that
    whosoever would, had leave and liberty to try and pull it from the stone.
    But though great multitudes of people came, both gentle and simple, for
    many days, no man could ever move the sword a hair's breadth from its
    place.

    Now, at the New Year's Eve a great tournament was to be held in London,
    which the archbishop had devised to keep together lords and commons, lest
    they should grow estranged in the troublous and unsettled times. To the
    which tournament there came, with many other knights, Sir Ector, Arthur's
    foster-father, who had great possessions near to London; and with him came
    his son, Sir Key, but recently made knight, to take his part in the
    jousting, and young Arthur also to witness all the sports and fighting.

    But as they rode towards the jousts, Sir Key found suddenly he had no
    sword, for he had left it at his father's house; and turning to young
    Arthur, he prayed him to ride back and fetch it for him. "I will with a
    good will," said Arthur; and rode fast back after the sword.

    But when he came to the house he found it locked and empty, for all were
    gone forth to see the tournament. Whereat, being angry and impatient, he
    said within himself, "I will ride to the churchyard and take with me the
    sword that sticketh in the stone, for my brother shall not go without a
    sword this day."

    So he rode and came to the churchyard, and alighting from his horse he
    tied him to the gate, and went to the pavilion, which was pitched near
    the stone, wherein abode the ten knights who watched and kept it; but he
    found no knights there, for all were gone to see the jousting.

    Then he took the sword by its handle, and lightly and fiercely he pulled
    it out of the stone, and took his horse and rode until he came to Sir Key
    and delivered him the sword. But as soon as Sir Key saw it he knew well it
    was the sword of the stone, and, riding swiftly to his father, he cried
    out, "Lo! here, sir, is the sword of the stone, wherefore it is I who must
    be king of all this land."

    When Sir Ector saw the sword, he turned back straight with Arthur and Sir
    Key and came to the churchyard, and there alighting, they went all three
    into the church, and Sir Key was sworn to tell truly how he came by the
    sword. Then he confessed it was his brother Arthur who had brought it to
    him.

    Whereat Sir Ector, turning to young Arthur, asked him - "How gottest thou
    the sword?"

    "Sir," said he, "I will tell you. When I went home to fetch my brother's
    sword, I found nobody to deliver it to me, for all were abroad to the
    jousts. Yet was I loath to leave my brother swordless, and, bethinking me
    of this one, I came hither eagerly to fetch it for him, and pulled it out
    of the stone without any pain."

    Then said Sir Ector, much amazed and looking steadfastly on Arthur, "If
    this indeed be thus, 'tis thou who shalt be king of all this land - and God
    will have it so - for none but he who should be rightful Lord of Britain
    might ever draw this sword forth from that stone. But let me now with mine
    own eyes see thee put back the sword into its place and draw it forth
    again."

    "That is no mystery," said Arthur; and straightway set it in the stone.
    And then Sir Ector pulled at it himself, and after him Sir Key, with all
    his might, but both of them in vain: then Arthur reaching forth his hand
    and grasping at the pommel, pulled it out easily, and at once.

    Then fell Sir Ector down upon his knees upon the ground before young
    Arthur, and Sir Key also with him, and straightway did him homage as their
    sovereign lord.

    [Illustration: Then fell Sir Ector down upon his knees upon the ground
    before young Arthur, and Sir Key also with him.]

    But Arthur cried aloud, "Alas! mine own dear father and my brother, why
    kneel ye thus to me?"

    "Nay, my Lord Arthur," answered then Sir Ector, "we are of no
    blood-kinship with thee, and little though I thought how high thy kin
    might be, yet wast thou never more than foster-child of mine." And then he
    told him all he knew about his infancy, and how a stranger had delivered
    him, with a great sum of gold, into his hands to be brought up and
    nourished as his own born child, and then had disappeared.

    But when young Arthur heard of it, he fell upon Sir Ector's neck, and
    wept, and made great lamentation, "For now," said he, "I have in one day
    lost my father and my mother and my brother."

    "Sir," said Sir Ector presently, "when thou shalt be made king be good and
    gracious unto me and mine."

    "If not," said Arthur, "I were no true man's son at all, for thou art he
    in all the world to whom I owe the most; and my good lady and mother, thy
    wife, hath ever kept and fostered me as though I were her own; so if it be
    God's will that I be king hereafter as thou sayest, desire of me whatever
    thing thou wilt and I will do it; and God forbid that I should fail thee
    in it."

    "I will but pray," replied Sir Ector, "that thou wilt make my son Sir Key,
    thy foster-brother, seneschal of all the lands."

    "That shall he be," said Arthur; "and never shall another hold that
    office, save thy son, while he and I do live."

    Anon, they left the church and went to the archbishop to tell him that the
    sword had been achieved. And when he saw the sword in Arthur's hand he set
    a day and summoned all the princes, knights, and barons to meet again at
    St. Paul's Church and see the will of Heaven signified. So when they came
    together, the sword was put back in the stone, and all tried, from the
    greatest to the least, to move it; but there before them all not one could
    take it out save Arthur only.

    But then befell a great confusion and dispute, for some cried out it was
    the will of Heaven, and, "Long live King Arthur," but many more were full
    of wrath and said, "What! would ye give the ancient sceptre of this land
    unto a boy born none know how?" And the contention growing greatly, till
    nothing could be done to pacify their rage, the meeting was at length
    broken up by the archbishop and adjourned till Candlemas, when all should
    meet again.

    But when Candlemas was come, Arthur alone again pulled forth the sword,
    though more than ever came to win it; and the barons, sorely vexed and
    angry, put it in delay till Easter. But as he had sped before so he did at
    Easter, and the barons yet once more contrived delays till Pentecost.

    But now the archbishop, fully seeing God's will, called together, by
    Merlin's counsel, a band of knights and gentlemen-at-arms, and set them
    about Arthur to keep him safely till the feast of Pentecost. And when at
    the feast Arthur still again alone prevailed to move the sword, the people
    all with one accord cried out, "Long live King Arthur! we will have no
    more delay, nor any other king, for so it is God's will; and we will slay
    whoso resisteth Him and Arthur;" and wherewithal they kneeled down all at
    once, and cried for Arthur's grace and pardon that they had so long
    delayed him from his crown. Then he full sweetly and majestically pardoned
    them; and taking in his hand the sword, he offered it upon the high altar
    of the church.

    Anon was he solemnly knighted with great pomp by the most famous knight
    there present, and the crown was placed upon his head; and, having taken
    oath to all the people, lords and commons, to be true king and deal in
    justice only unto his life's end, he received homage and service from all
    the barons who held lands and castles from the crown. Then he made Sir
    Key, High Steward of England, and Sir Badewaine of Britain, Constable, and
    Sir Ulfius, Chamberlain: and after this, with all his court and a great
    retinue of knights and armed men, he journeyed into Wales, and was crowned
    again in the old city of Caerleon-upon-Usk.

    Meanwhile those knights and barons who had so long delayed him from the
    crown, met together and went up to the coronation feast at Caerleon, as if
    to do him homage; and there they ate and drank such things as were set
    before them at the royal banquet, sitting with the others in the great
    hall.

    But when after the banquet Arthur began, according to the ancient royal
    custom, to bestow great boons and fiefs on whom he would, they all with
    one accord rose up, and scornfully refused his gifts, crying that they
    would take nothing from a beardless boy come of low or unknown birth, but
    would instead give him good gifts of hard sword-strokes between neck and
    shoulders.

    Whereat arose a deadly tumult in the hall, and every man there made him
    ready to fight. But Arthur leaped up as a flame of fire against them, and
    all his knights and barons drawing their swords, rushed after him upon
    them and began a full sore battle; and presently the king's party
    prevailed, and drave the rebels from the hall and from the city, closing
    the gates behind them; and King Arthur brake his sword upon them in his
    eagerness and rage.

    But amongst them were six kings of great renown and might, who more than
    all raged against Arthur and determined to destroy him, namely, King Lot,
    King Nanters, King Urien, King Carados, King Yder, and King Anguisant.
    These six, therefore, joining their armies together, laid close siege to
    the city of Caerleon, wherefrom King Arthur had so shamefully driven them.

    And after fifteen days Merlin came suddenly into their camp and asked them
    what this treason meant. Then he declared to them that Arthur was no base
    adventurer, but King Uther's son, whom they were bound to serve and honour
    even though Heaven had not vouchsafed the wondrous miracle of the sword.
    Some of the kings, when they heard Merlin speak thus, marvelled and
    believed him; but others, as King Lot, laughed him and his words to scorn,
    and mocked him for a conjurer and wizard. But it was agreed with Merlin
    that Arthur should come forth and speak with the kings.

    So he went forth to them to the city gate, and with him the archbishop and
    Merlin, and Sir Key, Sir Brastias, and a great company of others. And he
    spared them not in his speech, but spoke to them as king and chieftain
    telling them plainly he would make them all bow to him if he lived, unless
    they choose to do him homage there and then; and so they parted in great
    wrath, and each side armed in haste.

    "What will ye do?" said Merlin to the kings; "ye had best hold your hands,
    for were ye ten times as many ye should not prevail."

    "Shall we be afraid of a dream-reader?" quoth King Lot in scorn.

    With that Merlin vanished away and came to King Arthur.

    Then Arthur said to Merlin, "I have need now of a sword that shall
    chastise these rebels terribly."

    "Come then with me," said Merlin, "for hard by there is a sword that I can
    gain for thee."

    So they rode out that night till they came to a fair and broad lake, and
    in the midst of it King Arthur saw an arm thrust up, clothed in white
    samite, and holding a great sword in the hand.

    "Lo! yonder is the sword I spoke of," said Merlin.

    Then saw they a damsel floating on the lake in the Moonlight. "What damsel
    is that?" said the king.

    "The lady of the lake," said Merlin; "for upon this lake there is a rock,
    and on the rock a noble palace, where she abideth, and she will come
    towards thee presently, thou shalt ask her courteously for the sword."

    [Illustration: The lady of the lake.]

    Therewith the damsel came to King Arthur, and saluted him, and he saluted
    her, and said, "Lady, what sword is that the arm holdeth above the water?
    I would that it were mine, for I have no sword."

    "Sir King," said the lady of the lake, "that sword is mine, and if thou
    wilt give me in return a gift whenever I shall ask it of thee, thou shalt
    have it."

    "By my faith," said he, "I will give thee any gift that thou shalt ask."

    "Well," said the damsel, "go into yonder barge, and row thyself unto the
    sword, and take it and the scabbard with thee, and I will ask my gift of
    thee when I see my time."

    So King Arthur and Merlin alighted, and tied their horses to two trees,
    and went into the barge; and when they came to the sword that the hand
    held, King Arthur took it by the handle and bore it with him, and the arm
    and hand went down under the water; and so they came back to land, and
    rode again to Caerleon.

    On the morrow Merlin bade King Arthur to set fiercely on the enemy; and in
    the meanwhile three hundred good knights went over to King Arthur from the
    rebels' side. Then at the spring of day, when they had scarce left their
    tents, he fell on them with might and main, and Sir Badewaine, Sir Key,
    and Sir Brastias slew on the right hand and on the left marvellously; and
    ever in the thickest of the fight King Arthur raged like a young lion, and
    laid on with his sword, and did wondrous deeds of arms, to the joy and
    admiration of the knights and barons who beheld him.

    Then King Lot, King Carados, and the King of the Hundred Knights - who also
    rode with them - going round to the rear, set on King Arthur fiercely from
    behind; but Arthur, turning to his knights, fought ever in the foremost
    press until his horse was slain beneath him. At that, King Lot rode
    furiously at him, and smote him down; but rising straightway, and being
    set again on horseback, he drew his sword Excalibur that he had gained by
    Merlin from the lady of the lake, which, shining brightly as the light of
    thirty torches, dazzled the eyes of his enemies. And therewith falling on
    them afresh with all his knights, he drove them back and slew them in
    great numbers, and Merlin by his arts scattered among them fire and pitchy
    smoke, so that they broke and fled. Then all the common people of
    Caerleon, seeing them give way, rose up with one accord, and rushed at
    them with clubs and staves, and chased them far and wide, and slew many
    great knights and lords, and the remainder of them fled and were seen no
    more. Thus won King Arthur his first battle and put his enemies to shame.

    But the six kings, though sorely routed, prepared for a new war, and
    joining to themselves five others swore together that, whether for weal or
    woe, they would keep steadfast alliance till they had destroyed King
    Arthur. Then, with a host of 50,000 men-at-arms on horseback, and 10,000
    foot, they were soon ready, and sent forth their fore-riders, and drew
    from the northern country towards King Arthur, to the castle of Bedgraine.

    But he by Merlin's counsel had sent over sea to King Ban of Benwick and
    King Bors of Gaul, praying them to come and help him in his wars, and
    promising to help in return against King Claudas, their foe. To which
    those kings made answer that they would joyfully fulfil his wish, and
    shortly after came to London with 300 knights, well arrayed for both peace
    and war, leaving behind them a great army on the other side of the sea
    till they had consulted with King Arthur and his ministers how they might
    best dispose of it.

    And Merlin being asked for his advice and help, agreed to go himself and
    fetch it over sea to England, which in one night he did; and brought with
    him 10,000 horsemen and led them northward privately to the forest of
    Bedgraine, and there lodged them in a valley secretly.

    Then, by the counsel of Merlin, when they knew which way the eleven kings
    would ride and sleep, King Arthur with Kings Ban and Bors made themselves
    ready with their army for the fight, having yet but 30,000 men, counting
    the 10,000 who had come from Gaul.

    "Now shall ye do my advice," said Merlin; "I would that King Ban and King
    Bors, with all their fellowship of 10,000 men, were led to ambush in this
    wood ere daylight, and stir not therefrom until the battle hath been long
    waged. And thou, Lord Arthur, at the spring of day draw forth thine army
    before the enemy, and dress the battle so that they may at once see all
    thy host, for they will be the more rash and hardy when they see you have
    but 20,000 men."

    To this the three knights and the barons heartily consented, and it was
    done as Merlin had devised. So on the morrow when the hosts beheld each
    other, the host of the north was greatly cheered to find so few led out
    against them.

    Then gave King Arthur the command to Sir Ulfius and Sir Brastias to take
    3000 men-at-arms, and to open battle. They therefore setting fiercely on
    the enemy slew them on the right hand and the left till it was wonderful
    to see their slaughter.

    When the eleven kings beheld so small a band doing such mighty deeds of
    arms they were ashamed, and charged them fiercely in return. Then was Sir
    Ulfius' horse slain under him; but he fought well and marvellously on foot
    against Duke Eustace and King Clarience, who set upon him grievously, till
    Sir Brastias, seeing his great peril, pricked towards them swiftly, and so
    smote the duke through with his spear that horse and man fell down and
    rolled over. Whereat King Clarience turned upon Sir Brastias, and rushing
    furiously together they each unhorsed the other and fell both to the
    ground, and there lay a long time stunned, their horses' knees being cut
    to the bone. Then came Sir Key the seneschal with six companions, and did
    wondrous well, till the eleven kings went out against them and overthrew
    Sir Griflet and Sir Lucas the butler. And when Sir Key saw Sir Griflet
    unhorsed and on foot, he rode against King Nanters hotly and smote him
    down, and led his horse to Griflet and horsed him again; with the same
    spear did Sir Key smite down King Lot and wounded him full sore.

    But seeing that, the King of the Hundred Knights rushed at Sir Key and
    overthrew him in return, and took his horse and gave it to King Lot. And
    when Sir Griflet saw Sir Key's mischance, he set his spear in rest, and
    riding at a mighty man-at-arms, he cast him down headlong and caught his
    horse and led it straightway to Sir Key.

    By now the battle was growing perilous and hard, and both sides fought
    with rage and fury. And Sir Ulfius and Sir Brastias were both afoot and
    in great danger of their death, and foully stained and trampled under
    horses' feet. Then King Arthur, putting spurs to his horse, rushed forward
    like a lion into the midst of all the _melee_, and singling out King
    Cradlemont of North Wales, smote him through the left side and overthrew
    him, and taking his horse by the rein he brought it to Sir Ulfius in haste
    and said, "Take this horse, mine old friend, for thou hast great need of
    one, and charge by side of me." And even as he spoke he saw Sir Ector, Sir
    Key's father, smitten to the earth by the King of the Hundred Knights, and
    his horse taken to King Cradlemont.

    But when King Arthur saw him ride upon Sir Ector's horse his wrath was
    very great, and with his sword he smote King Cradlemont upon the helm, and
    shore off the fourth part thereof and of the shield, and drave the sword
    onward to the horse's neck and slew the horse, and hurled the king upon
    the ground.

    And now the battle waxed so great and furious that all the noise and sound
    thereof rang out by water and by wood, so that Kings Ban and Bors, with
    all their knights and men-at-arms in ambush, hearing the tumult and the
    cries, trembled and shook for eagerness, and scarce could stay in secret,
    but made them ready for the fray and dressed their shields and harness.

    But when King Arthur saw the fury of the enemy, he raged like a mad lion,
    and stirred and drove his horse now here, now there, to the right hand and
    to the left, and stayed not in his wrath till he had slain full twenty
    knights. He wounded also King Lot so sorely in the shoulder that he left
    the field, and in great pain and dolour cried out to the other kings, "Do
    ye as I devise, or we shall be destroyed. I, with the King of the Hundred
    Knights, King Anguisant, King Yder, and the Duke of Cambinet, will take
    fifteen thousand men and make a circuit, meanwhile that ye do hold the
    battle with twelve thousand. Then coming suddenly we will fall fiercely on
    them from behind and put them to the rout, but else shall we never stand
    against them."

    So Lot and four kings departed with their party to one side, and the six
    other kings dressed their ranks against King Arthur and fought long and
    stoutly.

    But now Kings Ban and Bors, with all their army fresh and eager, broke
    from their ambush and met face to face the five kings and their host as
    they came round behind, and then began a frantic struggle with breaking of
    spears and clashing of swords and slaying of men and horses. Anon King
    Lot, espying in the midst King Bors, cried out in great dismay, "Our Lady
    now defend us from our death and fearful wounds; our peril groweth great,
    for yonder cometh one of the worshipfullest kings and best knights in all
    the world."

    "Who is he?" said the King of the Hundred Knights.

    "It is King Bors of Gaul," replied King Lot, "and much I marvel how he may
    have come with all his host into this land without our knowledge."

    "Aha!" cried King Carados, "I will encounter with this king if ye will
    rescue me when there is need."

    "Ride on," said they.

    So King Carados and all his host rode softly till they came within a
    bow-shot of King Bors, and then both hosts, spurring their horses to their
    greatest swiftness, rushed at each other. And King Bors encountered in
    the onset with a knight, and struck him through with a spear, so that he
    fell dead upon the earth; then drawing his sword, he did such mighty feats
    of arms that all who saw him gazed with wonder. Anon King Ban came also
    forth upon the field with all his knights, and added yet more fury, sound,
    and slaughter, till at length both hosts of the eleven kings began to
    quake, and drawing all together into one body, they prepared to meet the
    worst, while a great multitude already fled.

    Then said King Lot, "Lords, we must take yet other means, or worse loss
    still awaits us. See ye not what people we have lost in waiting on the
    footmen, and that it costs ten horsemen to save one of them? Therefore it
    is my counsel to put away our footmen from us, for it is almost night, and
    King Arthur will not stay to slaughter them. So they can save their lives
    in this great wood hard by. Then let us gather into one band all the
    horsemen that remain, and whoso breaketh rank or leaveth us, let him be
    straightway slain by him that seeth him, for it is better that we slay a
    coward than through a coward be all slain. How say ye?" said King Lot;
    "answer me, all ye kings."

    "It is well said," replied they all.

    And swearing they would never fail each other, they mended and set right
    their armour and their shields, and took new spears and set them
    steadfastly against their thighs, waiting, and so stood still as a clump
    of trees stands on the plain; and no assaults could shake them, they held
    so hard together; which when King Arthur saw he marvelled greatly, and was
    very wroth. "Yet," cried he, "I may not blame them, by my faith, for they
    do as brave men ought to do, and are the best fighting men and knights of
    most prowess that I ever saw or heard tell of." And so said also Kings Ban
    and Bors, and praised them greatly for their noble chivalry.

    But now came forty noble knights out of King Arthur's host, and prayed
    that he would suffer them to break the enemy. And when they were allowed,
    they rode forth with their spears upon their thighs, and spurred their
    horses to their hottest. Then the eleven kings, with a party of their
    knights, rushed with set spears as fast and mightily to meet them; and
    when they were encountered, all the crash and splinter of their spears and
    armour rang with a mighty din, and so fierce and bloody was their onset
    that in all that day there had been no such cruel press, and rage, and
    smiting. At that same moment rode fiercely into the thickest of the
    struggle King Arthur and Kings Ban and Bors, and slew downright on both
    hands right and left, until their horses went in blood up to the fetlocks.

    And while the slaughter and the noise and shouting were at their greatest,
    suddenly there came down through the battle Merlin the Wizard, upon a
    great black horse, and riding to King Arthur, he cried out, "Alas, my
    Lord! will ye have never done? Of sixty thousand have ye left but fifteen
    thousand men alive. Is it not time to stay this slaying? for God is ill
    pleased with ye that ye have never ended, and yonder kings shall not be
    altogether overthrown this time. But if ye fall upon them any more, the
    fortune of this day will turn, and go to them. Withdraw, Lord, therefore,
    to thy lodging, and there now take thy rest, for to-day thou hast won a
    great victory, and overcome the noblest chivalry of all the world. And now
    for many years those kings shall not disturb thee. Therefore, I tell
    thee, fear them no more, for now they are sore beaten, and have nothing
    left them but their honour; and why shouldest thou slay them to take
    that?"

    Then said King Arthur, "Thou sayest well, and I will take thy counsel."
    With that he cried out, "Ho!" for the battle to cease, and sent forth
    heralds through the field to stay more fighting. And gathering all the
    spoil, he gave it not amongst his own host, but to Kings Ban and Bors and
    all their knights and men-at-arms, that he might treat them with the
    greater courtesy as strangers.

    Then Merlin took his leave of Arthur and the two other kings, and went to
    see his master, Blaise, a holy hermit, dwelling in Northumberland, who had
    nourished him through all his youth. And Blaise was passing glad to see
    him, for there was a great love ever between them; and Merlin told him how
    King Arthur had sped in the battle, and how it had ended; and told him the
    names of every king and knight of worship who was there. So Blaise wrote
    down the battle, word for word, as Merlin told him; and in the same way
    ever after, all the battles of King Arthur's days Merlin caused Blaise,
    his master, to record.




    CHAPTER III

    _The Adventure of the Questing Beast - King Arthur drives the Saxons from
    the Realm - The Battles of Celidon Forest and Badon Hill_


    Anon, thereafter, came word to King Arthur that Ryence, King of North
    Wales, was making war upon King Leodegrance of Camelgard; whereat he was
    passing wroth, for he loved Leodegrance well, and hated Ryence. So he
    departed with Kings Ban and Bors and twenty thousand men, and came to
    Camelgard, and rescued Leodegrance, and slew ten thousand of Ryence's men
    and put him to flight. Then Leodegrance made a great festival to the three
    kings, and treated them with every manner of mirth and pleasure which
    could be devised. And there had King Arthur the first sight of Guinevere,
    daughter of Leodegrance, whom in the end he married, as shall be told
    hereafter.

    Then did Kings Ban and Bors take leave, and went to their own country,
    where King Claudas worked great mischief. And King Arthur would have gone
    with them, but they refused him, saying, "Nay, ye shall not at this time,
    for ye have yet much to do in these lands of your own; and we with the
    riches we have won here by your gifts shall hire many good knights, and,
    by the grace of God, withstand the malice of King Claudas; and if we have
    need we will send to ye for succour; and likewise ye, if ye have need,
    send for us, and we will not tarry, by the faith of our bodies."

    When the two kings had left, King Arthur rode to Caerleon, and thither
    came to him his half-sister Belisent, wife to King Lot, sent as a
    messenger, but in truth to espy his power; and with her came a noble
    retinue, and also her four sons - Gawain, Gaheris, Agravaine, and Gareth.
    But when she saw King Arthur and his nobleness, and all the splendour of
    his knights and service, she forbore to spy upon him as a foe, and told
    him of her husband's plots against him and his throne. And the king, not
    knowing that she was his half-sister, made great court to her; and being
    full of admiration for her beauty, loved her out of measure, and kept her
    a long season at Caerleon. Wherefore her husband, King Lot, was more than
    ever King Arthur's enemy, and hated him till death with a passing great
    hatred.

    At that time King Arthur had a marvellous dream, which gave him great
    disquietness of heart. He dreamed that the whole land was full of many
    fiery griffins and serpents, which burnt and slew the people everywhere;
    and then that he himself fought with them, and that they did him mighty
    injuries, and wounded him nigh to death, but that at last he overcame and
    slew them all. When he woke, he sat in great heaviness of spirit and
    pensiveness, thinking what this dream might signify, but by-and-by, when
    he could by no means satisfy himself what it might mean, to rid himself of
    all his thoughts of it, he made ready with a great company to ride out
    hunting.

    As soon as he was in the forest, the king saw a great hart before him, and
    spurred his horse, and rode long eagerly after it, and chased until his
    horse lost breath and fell down dead from under him. Then, seeing the hart
    escaped and his horse dead, he sat down by a fountain, and fell into deep
    thought again. And as he sat there alone, he thought he heard the noise of
    hounds, as it were some thirty couple in number, and looking up he saw
    coming towards him the strangest beast that ever he had seen or heard tell
    of, which ran towards the fountain and drank of the water. Its head was
    like a serpent's, with a leopard's body and a lion's tail, and it was
    footed like a stag; and the noise was in its belly, as it were the baying
    or questing of thirty couple of hounds. While it drank there was no noise
    within it; but presently, having finished, it departed with a greater
    sound than ever.

    The king was amazed at all this; but being greatly wearied, he fell
    asleep, and was before long waked up by a knight on foot, who said,
    "Knight, full of thought and sleepy, tell me if thou sawest a strange
    beast pass this way?"

    "Such a one I saw," said King Arthur to the knight, "but that is now two
    miles distant at the least. What would you with that beast?"

    "Sir," said the knight, "I have followed it for a long time, and have
    killed my horse, and would to heaven I had another to pursue my quest
    withal."

    At that moment came a yeoman with another horse for the king, which, when
    the knight saw, he earnestly prayed to be given him. "For I have followed
    this quest," said he, "twelve months, and either I shall achieve him or
    bleed of the best blood of my body."

    It was King Pellinore who at that time followed the questing beast, but
    neither he nor King Arthur knew each other.

    "Sir Knight," said King Arthur, "leave that quest and suffer me to have
    it, and I will follow it other twelve months."

    "Ah, fool," said the knight, "thy desire is utterly in vain, for it shall
    never be achieved but by me, or by my next of kin."

    Therewith he started to the king's horse, and mounted to the saddle,
    crying out, "Grammercy, this horse is mine!"

    "Well," said the king, "thou mayest take my horse by force, and I will not
    say nay; but till we prove whether thou or I be best on horseback, I shall
    not rest content."

    "Seek me here," said the knight, "whenever thou wilt, and here by this
    fountain thou shalt find me;" and so he passed forth on his way.

    Then sat King Arthur in a deep fit of study, and bade his yeomen fetch him
    yet another horse as quickly as they could. And when they left him all
    alone came Merlin, disguised as a child of fourteen years of age, and
    saluted the king, and asked him why he was so pensive and heavy.

    "I may well be pensive and heavy," he replied, "for here even now I have
    seen the strangest sight I ever saw."

    "That know I well," said Merlin, "as well as thyself, and also all thy
    thoughts; but thou art foolish to take thought, for it will not amend
    thee. Also I know what thou art, and know thy father and thy mother."

    "That is false," said King Arthur; "how shouldst thou know? thy years are
    not enough."

    "Yea," said Merlin, "but I know better than thou how thou wast born, and
    better than any man living."

    "I will not believe thee," said King Arthur, and was wroth with the child.

    So Merlin departed, and came again in the likeness of an old man of
    fourscore years of age; and the king was glad at his coming, for he seemed
    wise and venerable. Then said the old man, "Why art thou so sad?"

    "For divers reasons," said King Arthur; "for I have seen strange things
    to-day, and but this moment there was here a child who told me things
    beyond his years to know."

    "Yea," said the old man, "but he told thee truth, and more he would have
    told thee hadst thou suffered him. But I will tell thee wherefore thou art
    sad, for thou hast done a thing of late for which God is displeased with
    thee, and what it is thou knowest in thy heart, though no man else may
    know."

    "What art thou," said King Arthur, starting up all pale, "that tellest me
    these tidings?"

    "I am Merlin," said he, "and I was he in the child's likeness, also."

    "Ah," said King Arthur, "thou art a marvellous and right fearful man, and
    I would ask and tell thee many things this day."

    As they talked came one with the king's horses, and so, King Arthur
    mounting one, and Merlin another, they rode together to Caerleon; and
    Merlin prophesied to Arthur of his death, and also foretold his own end.

    And now King Arthur, having utterly dispersed and overwhelmed those kings
    who had so long delayed his coronation, turned all his mind to overthrow
    the Saxon heathens who yet in many places spoiled the land. Calling
    together, therefore, his knights and men-at-arms, he rode with all his
    hosts to York, where Colgrin, the Saxon, lay with a great army; and there
    he fought a mighty battle, long and bloody, and drove him into the city,
    and besieged him. Then Baldulph, Colgrin's brother, came secretly with six
    thousand men to assail King Arthur and to raise the siege. But King Arthur
    was aware of him, and sent six hundred horsemen and three thousand foot to
    meet and fall on him instead. This therefore they did, encountering them
    at midnight, and utterly defeated them, till they fled away for life. But
    Baldulph, full of grief, resolved to share his brother's peril; wherefore
    he shaved his head and beard, and disguised himself as a jester, and so
    passed through King Arthur's camp, singing and playing on a harp, till by
    degrees he drew near to the city walls, where presently he made himself
    known, and was drawn up by ropes into the town.

    Anon, while Arthur closely watched the city, came news that full six
    hundred ships had landed countless swarms of Saxons, under Cheldric, on
    the eastern coast. At that he raised the siege, and marched straight to
    London, and there increased his army, and took counsel with his barons how
    to drive the Saxons from the land for evermore.

    Then with his nephew, Hoel, King of the Armorican Britons, who came with a
    great force to help him, King Arthur, with a mighty multitude of barons,
    knights, and fighting men, went swiftly up to Lincoln, which the Saxons
    lay besieging. And there he fought a passing fierce battle, and made
    grievous slaughter, killing above six thousand men, till the main body of
    them turned and fled. But he pursued them hotly into the wood of Celidon,
    where, sheltering themselves among the trees from his arrows, they made a
    stand, and for a long season bravely defended themselves. Anon, he ordered
    all the trees in that part of the forest to be cut down, leaving no
    shelter or ambush; and with their trunks and branches made a mighty
    barricade, which shut them in and hindered their escape. After three days,
    brought nigh to death by famine, they offered to give up their wealth of
    gold and silver spoils, and to depart forthwith in their empty ships;
    moreover, to pay tribute to King Arthur when they reached their home, and
    to leave him hostages till all was paid.

    This offer, therefore, he accepted, and suffered them to depart. But when
    they had been a few hours at sea, they repented of their shameful flight,
    and turned their ships back again, and landing at Totnes, ravaged all the
    land as far as the Severn, and, burning and slaying on all sides, bent
    their steps towards Bath.

    When King Arthur heard of their treachery and their return, he burned with
    anger till his eyes shone like two torches, and then he swore a mighty
    oath to rest no more until he had utterly destroyed those enemies of God
    and man, and had rooted them for ever out of the land of Britain. Then
    marching hotly with his armies on to Bath, he cried aloud to them, "Since
    these detestable impious heathens disdain to keep their faith with me, to
    keep faith with God, to whom I sware to cherish and defend this realm,
    will now this day avenge on them the blood of all that they have slain in
    Britain!"

    In like manner after him spoke the archbishop, standing upon a hill, and
    crying that to-day they should fight both for their country and for
    Paradise, "For whoso," he said, "shall in this holy war be slain, the
    angels shall forthwith receive him; for death in this cause shall be
    penance and absolution for all sins."

    At these words every man in the whole army raged with hatred, and pressed
    eagerly to rush upon those savages.

    Anon King Arthur, dressed in armour shining with gold and jewels, and
    wearing on his head a helmet with a golden dragon, took a shield painted
    with the likeness of the blessed Mary. Then girding on Excalibur and
    taking in his right hand his great lance Ron, he placed his men in order
    and led them out against the enemy, who stood for battle on the slope of
    Badon Hill, ranged in the form of a wedge, as their custom was. And they,
    resisting all the onslaughts of King Arthur and his host, made that day a
    stout defence, and at night lay down upon the hill.

    But on the next day Arthur led his army once again to the attack, and with
    wounds and slaughter such as no man had ever seen before, he drove the
    heathen step by step before him, backwards and upwards, till he stood with
    all his noblest knights upon the summit of the hill.

    And then men saw him, "red as the rising sun from spur to plume," lift up
    his sword, and, kneeling, kiss the cross of it; and after, rising to his
    feet, set might and main with all his fellowship upon the foe, till, as a
    troop of lions roaring for their prey, they drove them like a scattered
    herd along the plains, and cut them down till they could cut no more for
    weariness.

    That day King Arthur by himself alone slew with his word Excalibur four
    hundred and seventy heathens. Colgrin also, and his brother Baldulph, were
    slain.

    Then the king bade Cador, Duke of Cornwall, follow Cheldric, the chief
    leader, and the remnant of his hosts, unto the uttermost. He, therefore,
    when he had first seized their fleet, and filled it with chosen men, to
    beat them back when they should fly to it at last, chased them and slew
    them without mercy so long as he could overtake them. And though they
    crept with trembling hearts for shelter to the coverts of the woods and
    dens of mountains, yet even so they found no safety, for Cador slew them,
    even one by one. Last of all he caught and slew Cheldric himself, and
    slaughtering a great multitude took hostages for the surrender of the
    rest.

    Meanwhile, King Arthur turned from Badon Hill, and freed his nephew Hoel
    from the Scots and Picts, who besieged him in Alclud. And when he had
    defeated them in three sore battles, he drove them before him to a lake,
    which was one of the most wondrous lakes in all the world, for it was fed
    by sixty rivers, and had sixty islands, and sixty rocks, and on every
    island sixty eagles' nests. But King Arthur with a great fleet sailed
    round the rivers and besieged them in the lake for fifteen days, so that
    many thousands died of hunger.

    Anon the King of Ireland came with an army to relieve them; but Arthur,
    turning on him fiercely, routed him, and compelled him to retreat in
    terror to his land. Then he pursued his purpose, which was no less to
    destroy the race of Picts and Scots, who, beyond memory, had been a
    ceaseless torment to the Britons by their barbarous malice.

    So bitterly, therefore, did he treat them, giving quarter to none, that at
    length the bishops of that miserable country with the clergy met together,
    and, bearing all the holy relics, came barefooted to the king to pray his
    mercy for their people. As soon as they were led before him they fell down
    upon their knees, and piteously besought him to spare the few survivors of
    their countrymen, and grant them any corner of the land where they might
    live in peace. When he thus heard them, and knew that he had now fully
    punished them, he consented to their prayer, and withdrew his hosts from
    any further slaughter.

    Then turned he back to his own realm, and came to York for Christmas, and
    there with high solemnity observed that holy tide; and being passing
    grieved to see the ruin of the churches and houses, which the rage or the
    pagans had destroyed, he rebuilt them, and restored the city to its
    ancient happy state.

    And on a certain day, as the king sat with his barons, there came into the
    court a squire on horseback, carrying a knight before him wounded to the
    death, and told the king that hard by in the forest was a knight who had
    reared up a pavilion by the fountain, "and hath slain my master, a valiant
    knight, whose name was Nirles; wherefore I beseech thee, Lord, my master
    may be buried, and that some good knight may avenge his death."

    At that stepped forth a squire named Griflet, who was very young, being of
    the same age with King Arthur, and besought the king, for all the service
    he had done, to give him knighthood.

    "Thou art full young and tender of age," said King Arthur, "to take so
    high an order upon thee."

    "Sir," said Griflet, "I beseech thee make me a knight;" and Merlin also
    advising the king to grant his request, "Well," said Arthur, "be it then
    so," and knighted him forthwith. Then said he to him, "Since I have
    granted thee this favour, thou must in turn grant me a gift."

    "Whatsoever thou wilt, my lord," replied Sir Griflet.

    "Promise me," said King Arthur, "by the faith of thy body, that when thou
    hast jousted with this knight at the fountain, thou wilt return to me
    straightway, unless he slay thee."

    "I promise," said Sir Griflet; and taking his horse in haste, he dressed
    his shield, and took a spear in his hand and rode full gallop till he came
    to the fountain, by the side of which he saw a rich pavilion, and a great
    horse standing well saddled and bridled, and on a tree close by there hung
    a shield of many colours and a long lance.

    Then Sir Griflet smote upon the shield with the butt of his spear until he
    cast it to the ground. At that a knight came out of the pavilion and said,
    "Fair knight, why smote ye down my shield?"

    "Because," said Griflet, "I would joust with thee."

    "It were better not," replied the knight; "for thou art young and but
    lately made a knight, and thy strength is small compared to mine."

    "For all that," said Sir Griflet, "I will joust with ye."

    "I am full loath," replied the knight; "but if I must I must."

    Then did they wheel their horses far apart, and running them together,
    the strange knight shivered Sir Griflet's spear to fragments, and smote
    him through the shield and the left side, and broke his own spear into Sir
    Griflet's body, so that the truncheon stuck there, and Sir Griflet and his
    horse fell down. But when the strange knight saw him overthrown, he was
    sore grieved, and hastily alighted, for he thought that he had slain him.
    Then he unlaced his helm and gave him air, and tended him carefully till
    he came out of his swoon, and leaving the truncheon of his spear in his
    body, he set him upon horse, and commended him to God, and said he had a
    mighty heart, and if he lived would prove a passing good knight. And so
    Sir Griflet rode to the court, where, by aid of good physicians, he was
    healed in time and his life saved.

    At that same time there came before the king twelve old men, ambassadors
    from Lucius Tiberius, Emperor of Rome, and demanded of Arthur tribute unto
    Caesar for his realm, or else, said they, the emperor would destroy both
    him and his land. To whom King Arthur answered that he owed the emperor no
    tribute, nor would send him any; but said he, "On a fair field I will pay
    him his proper tribute - with a sharp spear and sword; and by my father's
    soul that tribute shall he take from me, whether he will or not." So the
    ambassadors departed passing wroth, and King Arthur was as wroth as they.

    But on the morrow of Sir Griflet's hurt, the king commanded to take his
    horse and armour secretly outside the city walls before sunrise of the
    next morning, and, rising a long while before dawn, he mounted up and took
    his shield and spear, and bade his chamberlain tarry till he came again;
    but he forbore to take Excalibur, for he had given it for safety into
    charge of his sister, Queen Morgan le Fay. And as the king rode at a soft
    pace he saw suddenly three villains chasing Merlin and making to attack
    and slay him. Clapping spurs to his horse, he rushed towards them, and
    cried out in a terrible voice, "Flee, churls, or take your deaths;" but
    they, as soon as they perceived a knight, fled away with the haste of
    hares.

    "O Merlin," said the king; "here hadst thou been killed, despite thy many
    crafts, had I not chanced to pass."

    "Not so," said Merlin, "for when I would, I could have saved myself; but
    thou art nearer to thy death than I, for without special help from heaven
    thou ridest now towards thy grave."

    And as they were thus talking, they came to the fountain and the rich
    pavilion pitched beside it, and saw a knight sitting all armed on a chair
    in the opening of the tent. "Sir knight," said King Arthur, "for what
    cause abidest thou here? to joust with any knight that passeth by? If so,
    I caution thee to quit that custom."

    "That custom," said the knight, "have I followed and will follow, let
    whosoever will say nay, and if any is aggrieved at it, let him who will
    amend it."

    "I will amend it," said King Arthur.

    "And I will defend it," answered the knight.

    Then the knight mounted his horse and made himself ready, and charging at
    each other they met so hard that both their lances splintered into pieces.
    Then King Arthur drew his sword, but the knight cried out, "Not so; but
    let us run another tilt together with sharp spears."

    "I would with a good will," said King Arthur; "but I have no more spears."

    "I have enough of spears," replied the knight, and called a squire, who
    brought two good new lances.

    Then spurring their horses, they rushed together with all their might, and
    broke each one his own spear short off in his hand. Then the king again
    put his hand to his sword, but the knight once more cried out, "Nay, yet
    abide awhile; ye are the best jouster that I ever met with; for the love
    of knighthood, let us joust yet once again."

    So once again they tilted with their fullest force, and this time King
    Arthur's spear was shivered, but the knight's held whole, and drove so
    furiously against the king that both his horse and he were hurled to the
    ground.

    At that, King Arthur was enraged and drew his sword and said, "I will
    attack thee now, Sir knight, on foot, for on horseback I have lost the
    honour."

    "I will be on horseback," said the knight. But when he saw him come on
    foot, he lighted from his horse, thinking it shame to have so great
    advantage.

    And then began they a strong battle, with many great strokes and grievous
    blows, and so hewed with their swords that the fragments of their armour
    flew about the fields, and both so bled that all the ground around was
    like a marsh of blood. Thus they fought long and mightily, and anon, after
    brief rest fell to again, and so hurtled together like two wild boars that
    they both rolled to the ground. At last their swords clashed furiously
    together, and the knight's sword shivered the king's in two.

    Then said the knight, "Now art thou in my power, to save thee or to slay.
    Yield therefore as defeated, and a recreant knight, or thou shall surely
    die."

    "As for death," replied King Arthur, "welcome be it when it cometh; but as
    for yielding me to thee as a recreant because of this poor accident upon
    my sword, I had far liefer die than be so shamed."

    So saying, he sprang on the knight, and took him by the middle and threw
    him down, and tore off his helm. But the knight, being a huge man,
    wrestled and struggled in a frenzy with the king until he brought him
    under, and tore off his helm in turn, and would have smitten off his head.

    At that came Merlin and said, "Knight, hold thy hand, for if thou slayest
    yonder knight, thou puttest all this realm to greater loss and damage than
    ever realm was in; for he is a man of greater worship than thou dreamest
    of."

    "Who then is he?" cried the knight.

    "Arthur Pendragon!" answered Merlin.

    Then would he have slain him for dread of his wrath, but Merlin cast a
    spell upon the knight, so that he fell suddenly to the earth in a deep
    sleep. Then raising up the king, he took the knight's horse for himself
    and rode away.

    "Alas," said King Arthur, "what hast thou done, Merlin? hast thou slain
    this good knight by thy crafts? There never lived a better knight; I had
    rather lose my kingdom for a year than have him dead."

    "Be not afraid," said Merlin; "he is more whole and sound than thou art,
    and is but in a sleep, wherefrom in three hours' time he will awake. I
    told thee what a knight he was, and how near thou wast to death. There
    liveth not a better knight than he in all the world, and hereafter he
    shall do thee good service. His name is King Pellinore, and he shall have
    two sons, who shall be passing valiant men, and, save one another, shall
    have no equal in prowess and in purity of life. The one shall be named
    Percival, and the other Lamoracke of Wales."

    So they rode on to Caerleon, and all the knights grieved greatly when they
    heard of this adventure, that the king would jeopardise his person thus
    alone. Yet could they not hide their joy at serving under such a noble
    chief, who adventured his own life as much as did the poorest knight among
    them all.




    CHAPTER IV

    _King Arthur Conquers Ireland and Norway, Slays the Giant of St. Michael's
    Mount, and Conquers Gaul - The Adventures of Sir Balin_


    The land of Britain being now in peace, and many great and valiant knights
    therein ready to take part in whatsoever battles or adventures might
    arise, King Arthur resolved to follow all his enemies to their own coasts.
    Anon he fitted out a great fleet, and sailing first to Ireland, in one
    battle he miserably routed the people of the country. The King of Ireland
    also he took prisoner, and forced all earls and barons to pay him homage.

    Having conquered Ireland, he went next to Iceland and subdued it also, and
    the winter being then arrived, returned to Britain.

    In the next year he set forth to Norway, whence many times the heathen had
    descended on the British coasts; for he was determined to give so terrible
    a lesson to those savages as should be told through all their tribes both
    far and near, and make his name fearful to them.

    As soon as he was come, Riculf, the king, with all the power of that
    country, met and gave him battle; but, after mighty slaughter, the Britons
    had at length the advantage, and slew Riculf and a countless multitude
    besides.

    Having thus defeated them, they set the cities on fire, dispersed the
    country people, and pursued the victory till they had reduced all Norway,
    as also Dacia, under the dominion of King Arthur.

    Now, therefore, having thus chastised those pagans who so long had
    harassed Britain, and put his yoke upon them, he voyaged on to Gaul, being
    steadfastly set upon defeating the Roman governor of that province, and so
    beginning to make good the threats which he had sent the emperor by his
    ambassadors.

    So soon as he was landed on the shores of Gaul, there came to him a
    countryman who told him of a fearful giant in the land of Brittany, who
    had slain, murdered, and devoured many people, and had lived for seven
    years upon young children only, "insomuch," said the man, "that all the
    children of the country are destroyed; and but the other day he seized
    upon our duchess, as she rode out with her men, and took her away to his
    lodging in a cave of a mountain, and though five hundred people followed
    her, yet could they give her no help or rescue, but left her shrieking and
    crying lamentably in the giant's hands; and, Lord, she is thy cousin
    Hoel's wife, who is of thy near kindred; wherefore, as thou art a rightful
    king, have pity on this lady; and as thou art a valiant conqueror, avenge
    us and deliver us."

    "Alas!" said King Arthur, "this is a great mischief that ye tell of. I had
    rather than the best realm I have, that I had rescued that lady ere the
    giant laid his hand on her; but tell me now, good fellow, canst thou bring
    me where this giant haunteth?"

    "Yea, Lord!" replied the man; "lo, yonder, where thou seest two great
    fires, there shall thou find him, and more treasure also than is in all
    Gaul besides."

    Then the king returned to his tent, and, calling Sir Key and Sir Bedwin,
    desired them to get horses ready for himself and them, for that after
    evensong he would ride a pilgrimage with them alone to St. Michael's
    Mount. So in the evening they departed, and rode as fast as they could
    till they came near the mount, and there alighted; and the king commanded
    the two knights to await him at the hill foot, while he went up alone.

    Then he ascended the mountain till he came to a great fire. And there he
    found a sorrowful widow wringing her hands and weeping miserably, sitting
    by a new-made grave. And saluting her, King Arthur prayed her wherefore
    she made such heavy lamentations.

    "Sir knight," she said, "speak softly, for yonder is a devil, who, if he
    hear thy voice, will come and straightway slay thee. Alas! what dost thou
    here? Fifty such men as thou were powerless to resist him. Here lieth dead
    my lady, Duchess of Brittany, wife to Sir Hoel, who was the fairest lady
    in the world, foully and shamefully slaughtered by that fiend! Beware that
    thou go not too nigh, for he hath overcome and vanquished fifteen kings,
    and hath made himself a coat of precious stones, embroidered with their
    beards; but if thou art hardy, and wilt speak with him, at yonder great
    fire he is at supper."

    "Well," said King Arthur, "I will accomplish mine errand, for all thy
    fearful words;" and so went forth to the crest of the hill, and saw where
    the giant sat at supper, gnawing on a limb of a man, and baking his huge
    frame by the fire, while three damsels turned three spits whereon were
    spitted, like larks, twelve young children lately born.

    [Illustration: The giant sat at supper, gnawing on a limb of a man, and
    baking his huge frame by the fire.]

    When King Arthur saw all that, his heart bled for sorrow, and he trembled
    for rage and indignation; then lifting up his voice he cried aloud - "God,
    that wieldeth all the world, give thee short life and shameful death, and
    may the devil have thy soul! Why hast thou slain those children and that
    fair lady? Wherefore arise, and prepare thee to perish, thou glutton and
    fiend, for this day thou shalt die by my hands."

    Then the giant, mad with fury at these words, started up, and seizing a
    great club, smote the king, and struck his crown from off his head. But
    King Arthur smote him with his sword so mightily in return, that all his
    blood gushed forth in streams.

    At that the giant, howling in great anguish, threw away his club of iron,
    and caught the king in both his arms and strove to crush his ribs
    together. But King Arthur struggled and writhed, and twisted him about, so
    that the giant could not hold him tightly; and as they fiercely wrestled,
    they both fell, and rolling over one another, tumbled - wrestling, and
    struggling, and fighting frantically - from rock to rock, till they came to
    the sea.

    And as they tore and strove and tumbled, the king ever and anon smote at
    the giant with his dagger, till his arms stiffened in death around King
    Arthur's body, and groaning horribly, he died. So presently the two
    knights came and found the king locked fast in the giant's arms, and very
    faint and weary, and loosed him from their hold.

    Then the king bade Sir Key to "smite off the giant's head and set it on
    the truncheon of a spear, and bear it to Sir Hoel, and tell him that his
    enemy is slain; and afterwards let it be fastened to the castle gate, that
    all the people may behold it. And go ye two up on the mountain and fetch
    me my shield and sword, and also the great club of iron ye will see there;
    and as for the treasure, ye shall find there wealth beyond counting, but
    take as much as ye will, for if I have his kirtle and the club, I desire
    no more."

    Then the knights fetched the club and kirtle, as the king had ordered, and
    took the treasure to themselves, as much as they could carry, and returned
    to the army. But when this deed was noised abroad, all the people came in
    multitudes to thank the king, who told them "to give thanks to God, and to
    divide the giant's spoils amongst them equally." And King Arthur desired
    Sir Hoel to build a church upon the mount, and dedicate it to the
    Archangel Michael.

    On the morrow, all the host moved onwards into the country of Champagne,
    and Flollo, the Roman tribune, retired before them into Paris. But while
    he was preparing to collect more forces from the neighbouring countries,
    King Arthur came upon him unawares, and besieged him in the town.

    And when a month had passed, Flollo - full of grief at the starvation of
    his people, who died in hundreds day by day - sent to King Arthur, and
    desired that they two might fight together; for he was a man of mighty
    stature and courage, and thought himself sure of the victory. This
    challenge, King Arthur, full weary the siege, accepted with great joy, and
    sent back word to Flollo that he would meet him whensoever he appointed.

    And a truce being made on both sides, they met together the next day on
    the island without the city, where all the people also were gathered to
    see the issue. And as the king and Flollo rode up to the lists, each was
    so nobly armed and horsed, and sat so mightily upon his saddle, that no
    man could tell which way the battle would end.

    When they had saluted one another, and presented themselves against each
    other with their lances aloft, they put spurs to their horses and began a
    fierce encounter. But King Arthur, carrying his spear more warily, struck
    it on the upper part of Flollo's breast, and flung him from his saddle to
    the earth. Then drawing his sword, he cried to him to rise, and rushed
    upon him; but Flollo, starting up, met him with his spear couched, and
    pierced the breast of King Arthur's horse, and overthrew both horse and
    man.

    The Britons, when they saw their king upon the ground, could scarcely keep
    themselves from breaking up the truce and falling on the Gauls. But as
    they were about to burst the barriers, and rush upon the lists, King
    Arthur hastily arose, and, guarding himself with his shield, ran with
    speed on Flollo. And now they renewed the assault with great rage, being
    sorely bent upon each other's death.

    At length, Flollo, seizing his advantage, gave King Arthur a huge stroke
    upon the helm, which nigh overthrew him, and drew forth his blood in
    streams.

    But when King Arthur saw his armour and shield red with blood, he was
    inflamed with fury, and lifting up Excalibur on high, with all his might,
    he struck straight through the helmet into Flollo's head, and smote it
    into halves; and Flollo falling backwards, and tearing up the ground with
    his spurs, expired.

    As soon as this news spread, the citizens all ran together, and, opening
    the gates, surrendered the city to the conqueror.

    And when he had overrun the whole province with his arms, and reduced it
    everywhere to subjection, he returned again to Britain, and held his court
    at Caerleon, with greater state than ever.

    Anon he invited thereto all the kings, dukes, earls, and barons, who owed
    him homage, that he might treat them royally, and reconcile them to each
    other, and to his rule.

    And never was there a city more fit and pleasant for such festivals. For
    on one side it was washed by a noble river, so that the kings and princes
    from the countries beyond sea might conveniently sail up to it; and on the
    other side, the beauty of the groves and meadows, and the stateliness and
    magnificence of the royal palaces, with lofty gilded roofs, made it even
    rival the grandeur of Rome. It was famous also for two great and noble
    churches, whereof one was built in honour of the martyr Julius, and
    adorned with a choir of virgins who had devoted themselves wholly to the
    service of God; and the other, founded in memory of St. Aaron, his
    companion, maintained a convent of canons, and was the third metropolitan
    church of Britain. Besides, there was a college of two hundred
    philosophers, learned in astronomy, and all the other sciences and arts.

    In this place, therefore, full of such delights, King Arthur held his
    court, with many jousts and tournaments, and royal huntings, and rested
    for a season after all his wars.

    And on a certain day there came into the court a messenger from Ryence,
    King of North Wales, bearing this message from his master: That King
    Ryence had discomfited eleven kings, and had compelled each one of them to
    cut off his beard; that he had trimmed a mantle with these beards, and
    lacked but one more beard to finish it; and that he therefore now sent for
    King Arthur's beard, which he required of him forthwith, or else he would
    enter his lands and burn and slay, and never leave them till he had taken
    by force not his beard only, but his head also.

    When King Arthur heard these words he flushed all scarlet, and rising in
    great anger said, "Well is it for thee that thou speakest another man's
    words with thy lips, and not thine own. Thou hast said thy message, which
    is the most insolent and villainous that ever man heard sent to any king:
    now hear my reply. My beard is yet too young to trim that mantle of thy
    master's with; yet, young although I be, I owe no homage either to him or
    any man - nor will ever owe. But, young although I be, I will have thy
    master's homage upon both his knees before this year be past, or else he
    shall lose his head, by the faith of my body, for this message is the
    shamefullest I ever heard speak of. I see well thy king hath never yet met
    with a worshipful man; but tell that King Arthur will have his head or his
    worship right soon."

    Then the messenger departed, and Arthur, looking round upon his knights,
    demanded of them if any there knew this King Ryence. "Yea," answered Sir
    Noran, "I know him well, and there be few better or stronger knights upon
    a field than he; and he is passing proud and haughty in his heart;
    wherefore I doubt not, Lord, he will make war on thee with mighty power."

    "Well," said King Arthur, "I shall be ready for him, and that shall he
    find."

    While the king thus spoke, there came into the hall a damsel having on a
    mantle richly furred, which she let fall and showed herself to be girded
    with a noble sword. The king being surprised at this, said, "Damsel,
    wherefore art thou girt with that sword, for it beseemeth thee not?"
    "Sir," said she, "I will tell thee. This sword wherewith I am thus girt
    gives me great sorrow and encumbrance, for I may not be delivered from it
    till I find a knight faithful and pure and true, strong of body and of
    valiant deeds, without guile or treachery, who shall be able to draw it
    from its scabbard, which no man else can do. And I have but just now come
    from the court of King Ryence, for there they told me many great and good
    knights were to be ever found; but he and all his knights have tried to
    draw it forth in vain - for none of them can move it."

    "This is a great marvel," said King Arthur; "I will myself try to draw
    forth this sword, not thinking in my heart that I am the best knight, but
    rather to begin and give example that all may try after me." Saying this,
    he took the sword and pulled at it with all his might, but could not shake
    or move it.

    "Thou needest not strive so hard, Lord," said the damsel, "for whoever may
    be able to pull it forth shall do so very easily." "Thou sayest well,"
    replied the king, remembering how he had himself drawn forth the sword
    from the stone before St. Paul's. "Now try ye, all my barons; but beware
    ye be not stained with shame, or any treachery, or guile." And turning
    away his face from them, King Arthur mused full heavily of sins within his
    breast he knew of, and which his failure brought to mind right sadly.

    Then all the barons present tried each after other, but could none of them
    succeed; whereat the damsel greatly wept, and said, "Alas, alas! I thought
    in this court to have found the best knight, without shame or treachery or
    treason."

    Now by chance there was at that time a poor knight with King Arthur, who
    had been prisoner at his court for half a year and more, charged with
    slaying unawares a knight who was a cousin of the king's. He was named
    Balin le Savage, and had been by the good offices of the barons delivered
    from prison, for he was of good and valiant address and gentle blood. He
    being secretly present at the court saw this adventure, and felt his heart
    rise high within him, and longed to try the sword as did the others; but
    being poor and poorly clad, he was ashamed to come forward in the press of
    knights and nobles. But in his heart he felt assured that he could do
    better - if Heaven willed - than any knight among them all.

    So as the damsel left the king, he called to her and said, "Damsel, I pray
    thee of thy courtesy, suffer me to try the sword as well as all these
    lords; for though I be but poorly clad, I feel assurance in my heart."

    The damsel looking at him, saw in him a likely an honest man, but because
    of his poor garments could not think him to be any knight of worship, and
    said, "Sir, there is no need to put me to any more pain or labour; why
    shouldst thou succeed where so many worthy ones have failed?"

    "Ah, fair lady," answered Balin, "worthiness and brave deeds are not shown
    by fair raiment, but manhood and truth lie hid within the heart. There be
    many worshipful knights unknown to all the people."

    "By my faith, thou sayest truth," replied the damsel; "try therefore, if
    thou wilt, what thou canst do."

    So Balin took the sword by the girdle and hilt, and drew it lightly out,
    and looking on its workmanship and brightness, it pleased him greatly.

    But the king and all the barons marvelled at Sir Balin's fortune, and many
    knights were envious of him, for, "Truly," said the damsel, "this is a
    passing good knight, and the best man I have ever found, and the most
    worshipfully free from treason, treachery, or villainy, and many wonders
    shall he achieve."

    "Now, gentle and courteous knight," continued she, turning to Balin, "give
    me the sword again."

    "Nay," said Sir Balin, "save it be taken from me by force, I shall
    preserve this sword for evermore."

    "Thou art not wise," replied the damsel, "to keep it from me; for if thou
    wilt do so, thou shalt slay with it the best friend thou hast, and the
    sword shall be thine destruction also."

    "I will take whatever adventure God may send," said Balin; "but the sword
    will I keep, by the faith of my body."

    "Thou will repent it shortly," said the damsel; "I would take the sword
    for thy sake rather than for mine for I am passing grieved and heavy for
    thy sake, who wilt not believe the peril I foretell thee." With that she
    departed, making great lamentation.

    Then Balin sent for his horse and armour, and took his leave of King
    Arthur, who urged him to stay at his court. "For," said he, "I believe
    that thou art displeased that I showed thee unkindness; blame me not
    overmuch, for I was misinformed against thee, and knew not truly what a
    knight of worship thou art. Abide in this court with my good knights, and
    I will so advance thee that thou shalt be well pleased."

    "God thank thee, Lord," said Balin, "for no man can reward thy bounty and
    thy nobleness; but at this time I must needs depart, praying thee ever to
    hold me in thy favour."

    "Truly," said King Arthur, "I am grieved for thy departure; but tarry not
    long, and thou shalt be right welcome to me and all my knights when thou
    returnest, and I will repair my neglect and all that I have done amiss
    against thee."

    "God thank thee, Lord," again said Balin, and made ready to depart.

    But meanwhile came into the court a lady upon horseback, full richly
    dressed, and saluted King Arthur, and asked him for the gift that he had
    promised her when she gave him his sword Excalibur, "for," said she, "I am
    the lady of the lake."

    "Ask what thou wilt," said the king, "and thou shalt have it, if I have
    power to give."

    "I ask," said she, "the head of that knight who hath just achieved the
    sword, or else the damsel's head who brought it, or else both; for the
    knight slew my brother, and the lady caused my father's death."

    "Truly," said King Arthur, "I cannot grant thee this desire; it were
    against my nature and against my name; but ask whatever else thou wilt,
    and I will do it."

    "I will demand no other thing," said she.

    And as she spake came Balin, on his way to leave the court, and saw her
    where she stood, and knew her straightway for his mother's murderess, whom
    he had sought in vain three years. And when they told him that she had
    asked King Arthur for his head, he went up straight to her and said, "May
    evil have thee! Thou desirest my head, therefore shalt thou lose thine;"
    and with his sword he lightly smote her head off, in the presence of the
    king and all the court.

    "Alas, for shame!" cried out King Arthur, rising up in wrath; "why hast
    thou done this, shaming both me and my court? I am beholden greatly to
    this lady, and under my safe conduct came she here; thy deed is passing
    shameful; never shall I forgive thy villainy."

    "Lord," cried Sir Balin, "hear me; this lady was the falsest living, and
    by her witchcraft hath destroyed many, and caused my mother also to be
    burnt to death by her false arts and treachery."

    "What cause soever thou mightest have had," said the king, "thou shouldst
    have forborne her in my presence. Deceive not thyself, thou shalt repent
    this sin, for such a shame was never brought upon my court; depart now
    from my face with all the haste thou mayest."

    Then Balin took up the head of the lady and carried it to his lodgings,
    and rode forth with his squire from out the town. Then said he, "Now must
    we part; take ye this head and bear it to my friends in Northumberland,
    and tell them how I speed, and that our worst foe is dead; also tell them
    that I am free from prison, and of the adventure of my sword."

    "Alas!" said the squire, "ye are greatly to blame to have so displeased
    King Arthur."

    "As for that," said Sir Balin, "I go now to find King Ryence, and destroy
    him or lose my life; for should I take him prisoner, and lead him to the
    court, perchance King Arthur would forgive me, and become my good and
    gracious lord."

    "Where shall I meet thee again?" said the squire.

    "In King Arthur's court," said Balin.




    CHAPTER V

    _Sir Balin Smites the Dolorous Stroke, and Fights with his Brother, Sir
    Balan_


    Now there was a knight at the court more envious than the others of Sir
    Balin, for he counted himself one of the best knights in Britain. His name
    was Lancear; and going to the king, he begged leave to follow after Sir
    Balin and avenge the insult he had put upon the court. "Do thy best,"
    replied the king, "for I am passing wroth with Balin."

    In the meantime came Merlin, and was told of this adventure of the sword
    and lady of the lake.

    "Now hear me," said he, "when I tell ye that this lady who hath brought
    the sword is the falsest damsel living."

    "Say not so," they answered, "for she hath a brother a good knight, who
    slew another knight this damsel loved; so she, to be revenged upon her
    brother, went to the Lady Lile, of Avilion, and besought her help. Then
    Lady Lile gave her the sword, and told her that no man should draw it
    forth but one, a valiant knight and strong, who should avenge her on her
    brother. This, therefore, was the reason why the damsel came here." "I
    know it all as well as ye do," answered Merlin; "and would to God she had
    never come hither, for never came she into any company but to do harm; and
    that good knight who hath achieved the sword shall be himself slain by it,
    which shall be great harm and loss, for a better knight there liveth not;
    and he shall do unto my lord the king great honour and service."

    Then Sir Lancear, having armed himself at all points, mounted, and rode
    after Sir Balin, as fast as he could go, and overtaking him, he cried
    aloud, "Abide, Sir knight! wait yet awhile, or I shall make thee do so."

    Hearing him cry, Sir Balin fiercely turned his horse, and said, "Fair
    knight, what wilt thou with me? wilt thou joust?"

    "Yea," said Sir Lancear, "it is for that I have pursued thee."

    "Peradventure," answered Balin, "thou hadst best have staid at home, for
    many a man who thinketh himself already victor, endeth by his own
    downfall. Of what court art thou?"

    "Of King Arthur's court," cried Lancear, "and I am come to revenge the
    insult thou hast put on it this day."

    "Well," said Sir Balin, "I see that I must fight thee, and I repent to be
    obliged to grieve King Arthur or his knights; and thy quarrel seemeth full
    foolish to me, for the damsel that is dead worked endless evils through
    the land, or else I had been loath as any knight that liveth to have slain
    a lady."

    "Make thee ready," shouted Lancear, "for one of us shall rest for ever in
    this field."

    But at their first encounter Sir Lancear's spear flew into splinters from
    Sir Balin's shield, and Sir Balin's lance pierced with such might through
    Sir Lancear's shield that it rove the hauberk also, and passed through the
    knight's body and the horse's crupper. And Sir Balin turning fiercely
    round again, drew out his sword, and knew not that he had already slain
    him; and then he saw him lie a corpse upon the ground.

    At that same moment came a damsel riding towards him as fast as her horse
    could gallop, who, when she saw Sir Lancear dead, wept and sorrowed out of
    measure, crying, "O, Sir Balin, two bodies hast thou slain, and one heart;
    and two hearts in one body; and two souls also hast thou lost."

    Therewith she took the sword from her dead lover's side - for she was Sir
    Lancear's lady-love - and setting the pommel of it on the ground, ran
    herself through the body with the blade.

    When Sir Balin saw her dead he was sorely hurt and grieved in spirit, and
    repented the death of Lancear, which had also caused so fair a lady's
    death. And being unable to look on their bodies for sorrow, he turned
    aside into a forest, where presently as he rode, he saw the arms of his
    brother, Sir Balan. And when they were met they put off their helms, and
    embraced each other, kissing, and weeping for joy and pity. Then Sir Balin
    told Sir Balan all his late adventures, and that he was on his way to King
    Ryence, who at that time was besieging Castle Terrabil. "I will be with
    thee," answered Sir Balan, "and we will help each other, as brethren ought
    to do."

    Anon by chance, as they were talking, came King Mark, of Cornwall, by that
    way, and when he saw the two dead bodies of Sir Lancear and his lady lying
    there, and heard the story of their death, he vowed to build a tomb to
    them before he left that place. So pitching his pavilion there, he sought
    through all the country round to find a monument, and found at last a rich
    and fair one in a church, which he took and raised above the dead knight
    and his damsel, writing on it - "Here lieth Lancear, son of the King of
    Ireland, who, at his own request, was slain by Balin; and here beside him
    also lieth his lady Colombe, who slew herself with her lover's sword for
    grief and sorrow."

    Then as Sir Balin and Sir Balan rode away, Merlin met with them, and said
    to Balin, "Thou hast done thyself great harm not to have saved that lady's
    life who slew herself; and because of it, thou shalt strike the most
    Dolorous Stroke that ever man struck, save he that smote our Lord. For
    thou shalt smite the truest and most worshipful of living knights, who
    shall not be recovered from his wounds for many years, and through that
    stroke three kingdoms shall be overwhelmed in poverty and misery."

    "If I believed," said Balin, "what thou sayest, I would slay myself to
    make thee a liar."

    At that Merlin vanished suddenly away; but afterwards he met them in
    disguise towards night, and told them he could lead them to King Ryence,
    whom they sought. "For this night he is to ride with sixty lances only
    through a wood hard by."

    So Sir Balin and Sir Balan hid themselves within the wood, and at midnight
    came out from their ambush among the leaves by the highway, and waited for
    the king, whom presently they heard approaching with his company. Then did
    they suddenly leap forth and smote at him and overthrew him and laid him
    on the ground, and turning on his company wounded and slew forty of them,
    and put the rest to flight. And returning to King Ryence they would have
    slain him there, but he craved mercy, and yielded to their grace, crying,
    "Knights full of prowess, slay me not; for by my life ye may win
    something - but my death can avail ye nought."

    "Ye say truth," said the two knights, and put him in a horse-litter, and
    went swiftly through all the night, till at cock-crow they came to King
    Arthur's palace. There they delivered him to the warders and porters, to
    be brought before the king, with this message - "That he was sent to King
    Arthur by the knight of the two swords (for so was Balin known by name,
    since his adventure with the damsel) and by his brother." And so they rode
    away again ere sunrise.

    Within a month or two thereafter, King Arthur being somewhat sick, went
    forth outside the town, and had his pavilion pitched in a meadow, and
    there abode, and laid him down on a pallet to sleep, but could get no
    rest. And as he lay he heard the sound of a great horse, and looking out
    of the tent door, saw a knight ride by, making great lamentation.

    "Abide, fair sir," said King Arthur, "and tell me wherefore thou makest
    this sorrow."

    "Ye may little amend it," said the knight, and so passed on.

    Presently after Sir Balin, rode, by chance, past that meadow, and when he
    saw the king he alighted and came to him on foot, and kneeled and saluted
    him.

    "By my head," said King Arthur, "ye be welcome, Sir Balin;" and then he
    thanked him heartily for revenging him upon King Ryence, and for sending
    him so speedily a prisoner to his castle, and told him how King Nero,
    Ryence's brother, had attacked him afterwards to deliver Ryence from
    prison; and how he had defeated him and slain him, and also King Lot, of
    Orkney who was joined with Nero, and whom King Pellinore had killed in the
    battle. Then when they had thus talked, King Arthur told Sir Balin of the
    sullen knight that had just passed his tent, and desired him to pursue him
    and to bring him back.

    So Sir Balin rode and overtook the knight in a forest with a damsel, and
    said, "Sir knight, thou must come back with me unto my lord, King Arthur,
    to tell him the cause of thy sorrow, which thou hast refused even now to
    do."

    "That will I not," replied the knight, "for it would harm me much, and do
    him no advantage."

    "Sir," said Sir Balin, "I pray thee make ready, for thou must needs go
    with me - or else I must fight with thee and take thee by force."

    "Wilt thou be warrant for safe conduct, if I go with thee?" inquired the
    knight.

    "Yea, surely," answered Balin, "I will die else."

    So the knight made ready to go with Sir Balin, and left the damsel in the
    wood.

    But as they went, there came one invisible, and smote the knight through
    the body with a spear. "Alas," cried Sir Herleus (for so was he named), "I
    am slain under thy guard and conduct, by that traitor knight called
    Garlon, who through magic and witchcraft rideth invisibly. Take,
    therefore, my horse, which is better than thine, and ride to the damsel
    whom we left, and the quest I had in hand, as she will lead thee - and
    revenge my death when thou best mayest."

    "That will I do," said Sir Balin, "by my knighthood, and so I swear to
    thee."

    Then went Sir Balin to the damsel, and rode forth with her; she carrying
    ever with her the truncheon of the spear wherewith Sir Herleus had been
    slain. And as they went, a good knight, Perin de Mountbelgard, joined
    their company, and vowed to take adventure with them wheresoever they
    might go. But presently as they passed a hermitage fast by a churchyard,
    came the knight Garlon, again invisible, and smote Sir Perin through the
    body with a spear, and slew him as he had slain Sir Herleus. Whereat, Sir
    Balin greatly raged, and swore to have Sir Garlon's life, whenever next he
    might encounter and behold him in his bodily shape. Anon, he and the
    hermit buried the good knight Sir Perin, and rode on with the damsel till
    they came to a great castle, whereinto they were about to enter. But when
    Sir Balin had passed through the gateway, the portcullis fell behind him
    suddenly, leaving the damsel on the outer side, with men around her,
    drawing their swords as if to slay her.

    When he saw that, Sir Balin climbed with eager haste by wall and tower,
    and leaped into the castle moat, and rushed towards the damsel and her
    enemies, with his sword drawn, to fight and slay them. But they cried out,
    "Put up thy sword, Sir knight, we will not fight thee in this quarrel, for
    we do nothing but an ancient custom of this castle."

    Then they told him that the lady of the castle was sick, and had lain ill
    for many years, and might never more be cured, unless she had a silver
    dish full of the blood of a pure maid and a king's daughter. Wherefore the
    custom of the castle was, that never should a damsel pass that way but she
    must give a dish full of her blood. Then Sir Balin suffered them to bleed
    the damsel with her own consent, but her blood helped not the lady of the
    castle. So on the morrow they departed, after right good cheer and rest.

    Then they rode three or four days without adventure and came at last to
    the abode of a rich man, who sumptuously lodged and fed them. And while
    they sat at supper Sir Balin heard a voice of some one groaning
    grievously. "What noise is this?" said he.

    "Forsooth," said the host, "I will tell you. I was lately at a tournament,
    and there I fought a knight who is brother to King Pelles, and overthrew
    him twice, for which he swore to be revenged on me through my best friend,
    and so he wounded my son, who cannot be recovered till I have that
    knight's blood, but he rideth through witchcraft always invisibly, and I
    know not his name."

    "Ah," said Sir Balin, "but I know him; his name is Garlon, and he hath
    slain two knights, companions of mine own, in the same fashion, and I
    would rather than all the riches in this realm that I might meet him face
    to face."

    "Well," said his host, "let me now tell thee that King Pelles hath
    proclaimed in all the country a great festival, to be held at Listeniss,
    in twenty days from now, whereto no knight may come without a lady. At
    that great feast we might perchance find out this Garlon, for many will be
    there; and if it please thee we will set forth together."

    So on the morrow they rode all three towards Listeniss, and travelled
    fifteen days, and reached it on the day the feast began. Then they
    alighted and stabled their horses, and went up to the castle, and Sir
    Balin's host was denied entrance, having no lady with him. But Sir Balin
    was right heartily received, and taken to a chamber, where they unarmed
    him, and dressed him in rich robes, of any colour that he chose, and told
    him he must lay aside his sword. This, however, he refused, and said, "It
    is the custom of my country for a knight to keep his sword ever with him;
    and if I may not keep it here, I will forthwith depart." Then they gave
    him leave to wear his sword. So he went to the great hall, and was set
    among knights of rank and worship, and his lady before him.

    Soon he found means to ask one who sat near him, "Is there not here a
    knight whose name is Garlon?"

    "Yonder he goeth," said his neighbour, "he with that black face; he is the
    most marvellous knight alive, for he rideth invisibly, and destroyeth whom
    he will."

    "Ah, well," said Balin, drawing a long breath, "is that indeed the man? I
    have aforetime heard of him."

    Then he mused long within himself, and thought, "If I shall slay him here
    and now, I shall not escape myself; but if I leave him, peradventure I
    shall never meet with him again at such advantage; and if he live, how
    much more harm and mischief will he do!"

    But while he deeply thought, and cast his eyes from time to time upon Sir
    Garlon, that false knight saw that he watched him, and thinking that he
    could at such a time escape revenge, he came and smote Sir Balin on the
    face with the back of his hand, and said, "Knight, why dost thou so watch
    me? be ashamed, and eat thy meat, and do that which thou camest for."

    "Thou sayest well," cried Sir Balin, rising fiercely; "now will I
    straightway do that which I came to do, as thou shalt find." With that he
    whirled his sword aloft and struck him downright on the head, and clove
    his skull asunder to the shoulder.

    "Give me the truncheon," cried out Sir Balin to his lady, "wherewith he
    slew thy knight." And when she gave it him - for she had always carried it
    about with her, wherever she had gone - he smote him through the body with
    it, and said, "With that truncheon didst thou treacherously murder a good
    knight, and now it sticketh in thy felon body."

    Then he called to the father of the wounded son, who had come with him to
    Listeniss, and said, "Now take as much blood as thou wilt, to heal thy son
    withal."

    But now arose a terrible confusion, and all the knights leaped from the
    table to slay Balin, King Pelles himself the foremost, who cried out,
    "Knight, thou hast slain my brother at my board; die, therefore, die, for
    thou shalt never leave this castle."

    "Slay me, thyself, then," shouted Balin.

    "Yea," said the king, "that will I! for no other man shall touch thee, for
    the love I bear my brother."

    Then King Pelles caught in his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at
    Balin, but Balin put his sword between his head and the king's stroke, and
    saved himself but lost his sword, which fell down smashed and shivered
    into pieces by the blow. So being weaponless he ran to the next room to
    find a sword, and so from room to room, with King Pelles after him, he in
    vain ever eagerly casting his eyes round every place to find some weapon.

    At last he ran into a chamber wondrous richly decked, where was a bed all
    dressed with cloth of gold, the richest that could be thought of, and one
    who lay quite still within the bed; and by the bedside stood a table of
    pure gold borne on four silver pillars, and on the table stood a
    marvellous spear, strangely wrought.

    When Sir Balin saw the spear he seized it in his hand, and turned upon
    King Pelles, and smote at him so fiercely and so sore that he dropped
    swooning to the ground.

    But at that Dolorous and awful Stroke the castle rocked and rove
    throughout, and all the walls fell crashed and breaking to the earth, and
    Balin himself fell also in their midst, struck as it were to stone, and
    powerless to move a hand or foot. And so three days he lay amidst the
    ruins, until Merlin came and raised him up and brought him a good horse,
    and bade him ride out of that land as swiftly as he could.

    [Illustration: The castle rocked and rove throughout, and all the walls
    fell crashed and breaking to the earth.]

    "May I not take the damsel with me I brought hither?" said Sir Balin.

    "Lo! where she lieth dead," said Merlin. "Ah, little knowest thou, Sir
    Balin, what thou hast done; for in this castle and that chamber which thou
    didst defile, was the blood of our Lord Christ! and also that most holy
    cup - the Sangreal - wherefrom the wine was drunk at the last supper of our
    Lord. Joseph of Arimathea brought it to this land, when first he came here
    to convert and save it. And on that bed of gold it was himself who lay,
    and the strange spear beside him was the spear wherewith the soldier
    Longus smote our Lord, which evermore had dripped with blood. King Pelles
    is the nearest kin to Joseph in direct descent, wherefore he held these
    holy things in trust; but now have they all gone at thy dolorous stroke,
    no man knoweth whither; and great is the damage to this land, which until
    now hath been the happiest of all lands, for by that stroke thou hast
    slain thousands, and by the loss and parting of the Sangreal the safety of
    this realm is put in peril, and its great happiness is gone for evermore."

    Then Balin departed from Merlin, struck to his soul with grief and sorrow,
    and said, "In this world shall we meet never more."

    So he rode forth through the fair cities and the country, and found the
    people lying dead on every side. And all the living cried out on him as he
    passed, "O Balin, all this misery hast thou done! For the dolorous stroke
    thou gavest King Pelles, three countries are destroyed, and doubt not but
    revenge will fall on thee at last!"

    When he had passed the boundary of those countries, he was somewhat
    comforted, and rode eight days without adventure. Anon he came to a cross,
    whereon was written in letters of gold, "It is not for a knight alone to
    ride towards this castle." Looking up, he saw a hoary ancient man come
    towards him, who said, "Sir Balin le Savage, thou passest thy bounds this
    way; therefore turn back again, it will be best for thee;" and with these
    words he vanished.

    Then did he hear a horn blow as it were the deathnote of some hunted
    beast. "That blast," said Balin, "is blown for me, for I am the prey;
    though yet I be not dead." But as he spoke he saw a hundred ladies with a
    great troop of knights come forth to meet him, with bright faces and
    great welcome, who led him to the castle and made a great feast, with
    dancing and minstrelsy and all manner of joy.

    Then the chief lady of the castle said, "Knight with the two swords, thou
    must encounter and fight with a knight hard by, who dwelleth on an island,
    for no man may pass this way without encountering him."

    "It is a grievous custom," answered Sir Balin.

    "There is but one knight to defeat," replied the lady.

    "Well," said Sir Balin, "be it as thou wilt. I am ready and quite willing,
    and though my horse and my body be full weary, yet is my heart not weary,
    save of life. And truly I were glad if I might meet my death."

    "Sir," said one standing by, "methinketh your shield is not good; I will
    lend you a bigger."

    "I thank thee, sir," said Balin, and took the unknown shield and left his
    own, and so rode forth, and put himself and horse into a boat and came to
    the island.

    As soon as he had landed, he saw come riding towards him, a knight dressed
    all in red, upon a horse trapped in the same colour. When the red knight
    saw Sir Balin, and the two swords he wore, he thought it must have been
    his brother (for the red knight was Sir Balan), but when he saw the
    strange arms on his shield, he forgot the thought, and came against him
    fiercely. At the first course they overthrew each other, and both lay
    swooning on the ground; but Sir Balin was the most hurt and bruised, for
    he was weary and spent with travelling. So Sir Balan rose up first to his
    feet and drew his sword, and Sir Balin painfully rose against him and
    raised his shield.

    Then Sir Balan smote him through the shield and brake his helmet; and Sir
    Balin, in return, smote at him with his fated sword, and had wellnigh
    slain his brother. So they fought till their breaths failed.

    Then Sir Balin, looking up, saw all the castle towers stand full of
    ladies. So they went again to battle, and wounded each other full sore,
    and paused, and breathed again, and then again began the fight; and this
    for many times they did, till all the ground was red with blood. And by
    now, each had full grievously wounded the other with seven great wounds,
    the least of which might have destroyed the mightiest giant in the world.
    But still they rose against each other, although their hauberks now were
    all unnailed, and they smiting at each other's naked bodies with their
    sharp swords. At the last, Sir Balan, the younger brother, withdrew a
    little space and laid him down.

    Then said Sir Balin le Savage, "What knight art thou? for never before
    have I found a knight to match me thus."

    "My name," said he, all faintly, "is Balan, brother to the good knight Sir
    Balin."

    "Ah, God!" cried Balin, "that ever I should see this day!" and therewith
    fell down backwards in a swoon.

    Then Sir Balan crept with pain upon his feet and hands, and put his
    brother's helmet off his head, but could not know him by his face, it was
    so hewed and bloody. But presently, when Sir Balin came to, he said, "Oh!
    Balan, mine own brother, thou hast slain me, and I thee! All the wide
    world saw never greater grief!"

    "Alas!" said Sir Balan, "that I ever saw this day; and through mishap
    alone I knew thee not, for when I saw thy two swords, if it had not been
    for thy strange shield, I should have known thee for my brother."

    "Alas!" said Balin, "all this sorrow lieth at the door of one unhappy
    knight within the castle, who made me change my shield. If I might live, I
    would destroy that castle and its evil customs."

    "It were well done," said Balan, "for since I first came hither I have
    never been able to depart, for here they made me fight with one who kept
    this island, whom I slew, and by enchantment I might never quit it more;
    nor couldst thou, brother, hadst thou slain me, and escaped with thine own
    life."

    Anon came the lady of the castle, and when she heard their talk, and saw
    their evil case, she wrung her hands and wept bitterly. So Sir Balan
    prayed the lady of her gentleness that, for his true service, she would
    bury them both together in that place. This she granted, weeping full
    sore, and said it should be done right solemnly and richly, and in the
    noblest manner possible. Then did they send for a priest, and received the
    holy sacrament at his hands. And Balin said, "Write over us upon our tomb,
    that here two brethren slew each other; then shall never good knight or
    pilgrim pass this way but he will pray for both our souls." And anon Sir
    Balan died, but Sir Balin died not till the midnight after; and then they
    both were buried.

    On the morrow of their death came Merlin, and took Sir Balin's sword and
    fixed on it a new pommel, and set it in a mighty stone, which then, by
    magic, he made float upon the water. And so, for many years, it floated to
    and fro around the island, till it swam down the river to Camelot, where
    young Sir Galahad achieved it, as shall be told hereafter.




    CHAPTER VI

    _The Marriage of King Arthur and Queen Guinevere, and the Founding of the
    Round Table - The Adventure of the Hart and Hound_


    It befell upon a certain day, that King Arthur said to Merlin, "My lords
    and knights do daily pray me now to take a wife; but I will have none
    without thy counsel, for thou hast ever helped me since I came first to
    this crown."

    "It is well," said Merlin, "that thou shouldst take a wife, for no man of
    bounteous and noble nature should live without one; but is there any lady
    whom thou lovest better than another?"

    "Yea," said King Arthur, "I love Guinevere, the daughter of King
    Leodegrance, of Camelgard, who also holdeth in his house the Round Table
    that he had from my father Uther; and as I think, that damsel is the
    gentlest and the fairest lady living."

    "Sir," answered Merlin, "as for her beauty, she is one of the fairest that
    do live; but if ye had not loved her as ye do, I would fain have had ye
    choose some other who was both fair and good. But where a man's heart is
    set, he will be loath to leave." This Merlin said, knowing the misery
    that should hereafter happen from this marriage.

    Then King Arthur sent word to King Leodegrance that he mightily desired to
    wed his daughter, and how that he had loved her since he saw her first,
    when with Kings Ban and Bors he rescued Leodegrance from King Ryence of
    North Wales.

    When King Leodegrance heard the message, he cried out "These be the best
    tidings I have heard in all my life - so great and worshipful a prince to
    seek my daughter for his wife! I would fain give him half my lands with
    her straightway, but that he needeth none - and better will it please him
    that I send him the Round Table of King Uther, his father, with a hundred
    good knights towards the furnishing of it with guests, for he will soon
    find means to gather more, and make the table full."

    Then King Leodegrance delivered his daughter Guinevere to the messengers
    of King Arthur, and also the Round Table with the hundred knights.

    So they rode royally and freshly, sometimes by water and sometimes by
    land, towards Camelot. And as they rode along in the spring weather, they
    made full many sports and pastimes. And, in all those sports and games, a
    young knight lately come to Arthur's court, Sir Lancelot by name, was
    passing strong, and won praise from all, being full of grace and
    hardihood; and Guinevere also ever looked on him with joy. And always in
    the eventide, when the tents were set beside some stream or forest, many
    minstrels came and sang before the knights and ladies as they sat in the
    tent-doors, and many knights would tell adventures; and still Sir Lancelot
    was foremost, and told the knightliest tales, and sang the goodliest
    songs, of all the company.

    And when they came to Camelot, King Arthur made great joy, and all the
    city with him; and riding forth with a great retinue he met Guinevere and
    her company, and led her through the streets all filled with people, and
    in the midst of all their shoutings and the ringing of church bells, to a
    palace hard by his own.

    Then, in all haste, the king commanded to prepare the marriage and the
    coronation with the stateliest and most honourable pomp that could be
    made. And when the day was come, the archbishops led the king to the
    cathedral, whereto he walked, clad in his royal robes, and having four
    kings, bearing four golden swords, before him; a choir of passing sweet
    music going also with him.

    In another part, was the queen dressed in her richest ornaments, and led
    by archbishops and bishops to the Chapel of the Virgins, the four queens
    also of the four kings last mentioned walked before her, bearing four
    white doves, according to ancient custom; and after her there followed
    many damsels, singing and making every sign of joy.

    And when the two processions were come to the churches, so wondrous was
    the music and the singing, that all the knights and barons who were there
    pressed on each other, as in the crowd of battle, to hear and see the most
    they might.

    When the king was crowned, he called together all the knights that came
    with the Round Table from Camelgard, and twenty-eight others, great and
    valiant men, chosen by Merlin out of all the realm, towards making up the
    full number of the table. Then the Archbishop of Canterbury blessed the
    seats of all the knights, and when they rose again therefrom to pay their
    homage to King Arthur there was found upon the back of each knight's seat
    his name, written in letters of gold. But upon one seat was found written,
    "This is the Siege Perilous, wherein if any man shall sit save him whom
    Heaven hath chosen, he shall be devoured by fire."

    Anon came young Gawain, the king's nephew, praying to be made a knight,
    whom the king knighted then and there. Soon after came a poor man, leading
    with him a tall fair lad of eighteen years of age, riding on a lean mare.
    And falling at the king's feet, the poor man said, "Lord, it was told me,
    that at this time of thy marriage thou wouldst give to any man the gift he
    asked for, so it were not unreasonable."

    "That is the truth," replied King Arthur, "and I will make it good."

    "Thou sayest graciously and nobly," said the poor man. "Lord, I ask
    nothing else but that thou wilt make my son here a knight."

    "It is a great thing that thou askest," said the king. "What is thy name?"

    "Aries, the cowherd," answered he.

    "Cometh this prayer from thee or from thy son?" inquired King Arthur.

    "Nay, lord, not from myself," said he, "but from him only, for I have
    thirteen other sons, and all of them will fall to any labour that I put
    them to. But this one will do no such work for anything that I or my wife
    may do, but is for ever shooting or fighting, and running to see knights
    and joustings, and torments me both night and day that he be made a
    knight."

    "What is thy name?" said the king to the young man.

    "My name is Tor," said he.

    Then the king, looking at him steadfastly, was well pleased with his face
    and figure, and with his look of nobleness and strength.

    "Fetch all thy other sons before me," said the king to Aries. But when he
    brought them, none of them resembled Tor in size or shape or feature.

    Then the king knighted Tor, saying, "Be thou to thy life's end a good
    knight and a true, as I pray God thou mayest be; and if thou provest
    worthy, and of prowess, one day thou shall be counted in the Round Table."
    Then turning to Merlin, Arthur said, "Prophesy now, O Merlin, shall Sir
    Tor become a worthy knight, or not?"

    "Yea, lord," said Merlin, "so he ought to be, for he is the son of that
    King Pellinore whom thou hast met, and proved to be one of the best
    knights living. He is no cowherd's son."

    Presently after came in King Pellinore, and when he saw Sir Tor he knew
    him for his son, and was more pleased than words can tell to find him
    knighted by the king. And Pellinore did homage to King Arthur, and was
    gladly and graciously accepted of the king; and then was led by Merlin to
    a high seat at the Table Round, near to the Perilous Seat.

    But Sir Gawain was full of anger at the honour done King Pellinore, and
    said to his brother Gaheris, "He slew our father, King Lot, therefore will
    I slay him."

    "Do it not yet," said he; "wait till I also be a knight, then will I help
    ye in it: it is best ye suffer him to go at this time, and not trouble
    this high feast with bloodshed."

    "As ye will, be it," said Sir Gawain.

    Then rose the king and spake to all the Table Round, and charged them to
    be ever true and noble knights, to do neither outrage nor murder, nor any
    unjust violence, and always to flee treason; also by no means ever to be
    cruel, but give mercy unto him that asked for mercy, upon pain of
    forfeiting the liberty of his court for evermore. Moreover, at all times,
    on pain of death, to give all succour unto ladies and young damsels; and
    lastly, never to take part in any wrongful quarrel, for reward or payment.
    And to all this he swore them knight by knight.

    Then he ordained that, every year at Pentecost, they should all come
    before him, wheresoever he might appoint a place, and give account of all
    their doings and adventures of the past twelvemonth. And so, with prayer
    and blessing, and high words of cheer, he instituted the most noble order
    of the Round Table, whereto the best and bravest knights in all the world
    sought afterwards to find admission.

    Then was the high feast made ready, and the king and queen sat side by
    side, before the whole assembly; and great and royal was the banquet and
    the pomp.

    And as they sat, each man in his place, Merlin went round and said, "Sit
    still awhile, for ye shall see a strange and marvellous adventure."

    So as they sat, there suddenly came running through the hall, a white
    hart, with a white hound next after him, and thirty couple of black
    running hounds, making full cry; and the hart made circuit of the Table
    Round, and past the other tables; and suddenly the white hound flew upon
    him and bit him fiercely, and tore out a piece from his haunch. Whereat
    the hart sprang suddenly with a great leap, and overthrew a knight sitting
    at the table, who rose forthwith, and, taking up the hound, mounted, and
    rode fast away.

    But no sooner had he left, than there came in a lady, mounted on a white
    palfrey, who cried out to the king, "Lord, suffer me not to have this
    injury! - the hound is mine which that knight taketh." And as she spake, a
    knight rode in all armed, on a great horse, and suddenly took up the lady
    and rode away with her by force, although she greatly cried and moaned.

    Then the king desired Sir Gawain, Sir Tor, and King Pellinore to mount and
    follow this adventure to the uttermost; and told Sir Gawain to bring back
    the hart, Sir Tor the hound and knight, and King Pellinore the knight and
    the lady.

    So Sir Gawain rode forth at a swift pace, and with him Gaheris, his
    brother, for a squire. And as they went, they saw two knights fighting on
    horseback, and when they reached them they divided them and asked the
    reason of their quarrel. "We fight for a foolish matter," one replied,
    "for we be brethren; but there came by a white hart this way, chased by
    many hounds, and thinking it was an adventure for the high feast of King
    Arthur, I would have followed it to have gained worship; whereat my
    younger brother here declared he was the better knight and would go after
    it instead, and so we fight to prove which of us be the better knight."

    "This is a foolish thing," said Sir Gawain. "Fight with all strangers, if
    ye will, but not brother with brother. Take my advice, set on against me,
    and if ye yield to me, as I shall do my best to make ye, ye shall go to
    King Arthur and yield ye to his grace."

    "Sir knight," replied the brothers, "we are weary, and will do thy wish
    without encountering thee; but by whom shall we tell the king that we were
    sent?"

    "By the knight that followeth the quest of the white hart," said Sir
    Gawain. "And now tell me your names, and let us part."

    "Sorlous and Brian of the Forest," they replied; and so they went their
    way to the king's court.

    Then Sir Gawain, still following his quest by the distant baying of the
    hounds, came to a great river, and saw the hart swimming over and near to
    the further bank. And as he was about to plunge in and swim after, he saw
    a knight upon the other side, who cried, "Come not over here, Sir knight,
    after that hart, save thou wilt joust with me."

    "I will not fail for that," said Sir Gawain; and swam his horse across the
    stream.

    Anon they got their spears, and ran against each other fiercely; and Sir
    Gawain smote the stranger off his horse, and turning, bade him yield.

    "Nay," replied he, "not so; for though ye have the better of me on
    horseback, I pray thee, valiant knight, alight, and let us match together
    with our swords on foot."

    "What is thy name?" quoth Gawain.

    "Allardin of the Isles," replied the stranger.

    Then they fell on each other; but soon Sir Gawain struck him through the
    helm, so deeply and so hard, that all his brains were scattered, and Sir
    Allardin fell dead. "Ah," said Gaheris, "that was a mighty stroke for a
    young knight!"

    Then did they turn again to follow the white hart, and let slip three
    couple of greyhounds after him; and at the last they chased him to a
    castle, and there they overtook and slew him, in the chief courtyard.

    At that there rushed a knight forth from a chamber, with a drawn sword in
    his hand, and slew two of the hounds before their eyes, and chased the
    others from the castle, crying, "Oh, my white hart! alas, that thou art
    dead! for thee my sovereign lady gave to me, and evil have I kept thee;
    but if I live, thy death shall be dear bought." Anon he went within and
    armed, and came out fiercely, and met Sir Gawain face to face.

    "Why have ye slain my hounds?" said Sir Gawain; "they did but after their
    nature: and ye had better have taken vengeance on me than on the poor dumb
    beasts."

    "I will avenge me on thee, also," said the other, "ere thou depart this
    place."

    Then did they fight with each other savagely and madly, till the blood ran
    down to their feet. But at last Sir Gawain had the better, and felled the
    knight of the castle to the ground. Then he cried out for mercy, and
    yielded to Sir Gawain, and besought him as he was a knight and gentleman
    to save his life. "Thou shalt die," said Sir Gawain, "for slaying my
    hounds."

    "I will make thee all amends within my power," replied the knight.

    But Sir Gawain would have no mercy, and unlaced his helm to strike his
    head off; and so blind was he with rage, that he saw not where a lady ran
    out from her chamber and fell down upon his enemy. And making a fierce
    blow at him, he smote off by mischance the lady's head.

    "Alas!" cried Gaheris, "foully and shamefully have ye done - the shame
    shall never leave ye! Why give ye not your mercy unto them that ask it? a
    knight without mercy is without worship also."

    Then Sir Gawain was sore amazed at that fair lady's death, and knew not
    what to do, and said to the fallen knight, "Arise, for I will give thee
    mercy."

    "Nay, nay," said he, "I care not for thy mercy now, for thou hast slain my
    lady and my love - that of all earthly things I loved the best."

    "I repent me sorely of it," said Sir Gawain, "for I meant to have struck
    thee: but now shalt thou go to King Arthur and tell him this adventure,
    and how thou hast been overcome by the knight that followeth the quest of
    the white hart."

    "I care not whether I live or die, or where I go," replied the knight.

    So Sir Gawain sent him to the court to Camelot, making him bear one dead
    greyhound before and one behind him on his horse. "Tell me thy name before
    we part," said he.

    "My name is Athmore of the Marsh," he answered.

    Then went Sir Gawain into the castle, and prepared to sleep there and
    began to unarm; but Gaheris upbraided him, saying, "Will ye disarm in this
    strange country? bethink ye, ye must needs have many enemies about."

    No sooner had he spoken than there came out suddenly four knights, well
    armed, and assailed them hard, saying to Sir Gawain, "Thou new-made
    knight, how hast thou shamed thy knighthood! a knight without mercy is
    dishonoured! Slayer of fair ladies, shame to thee evermore! Doubt not thou
    shalt thyself have need of mercy ere we leave thee."

    Then were the brothers in great jeopardy, and feared for their lives, for
    they were but two to four, and weary with travelling; and one of the four
    knights shot Sir Gawain with a bolt, and hit him through the arm, so that
    he could fight no more. But when there was nothing left for them but
    death, there came four ladies forth and prayed the four knights' mercy for
    the strangers. So they gave Sir Gawain and Gaheris their lives, and made
    them yield themselves prisoners.

    On the morrow, came one of the ladies to Sir Gawain, and talked with him,
    saying, "Sir knight, what cheer?"

    "Not good," said he.

    "It is your own default, sir," said the lady, "for ye have done a passing
    foul deed in slaying that fair damsel yesterday - and ever shall it be
    great shame to you. But ye be not of King Arthur's kin."

    "Yea, truly am I," said he; "my name is Gawain, son of King Lot of Orkney,
    whom King Pellinore slew - and my mother, Belisent, is half-sister to the
    king."

    When the lady heard that, she went and presently got leave for him to quit
    the castle; and they gave him the head of the white hart to take with him,
    because it was in his quest; but made him also carry the dead lady with
    him - her head hung round his neck and her body lay before him on his
    horse's neck.

    So in that fashion he rode back to Camelot; and when the king and queen
    saw him, and heard tell of his adventures, they were heavily displeased,
    and, by the order of the queen, he was put upon his trial before a court
    of ladies - who judged him to be evermore, for all his life, the knight of
    ladies' quarrels, and to fight always on their side, and never against
    any, except he fought for one lady and his adversary for another; also
    they charged him never to refuse mercy to him that asked it, and swore him
    to it on the Holy Gospels. Thus ended the adventure of the white hart.

    Meanwhile, Sir Tor had made him ready, and followed the knight who rode
    away with the hound. And as he went, there suddenly met him in the road a
    dwarf, who struck his horse so viciously upon the head with a great staff,
    that he leaped backwards a spear's length.

    "Wherefore so smitest thou my horse, foul dwarf?" shouted Sir Tor.

    "Because thou shall not pass this way," replied the dwarf, "unless thou
    fight for it with yonder knights in those pavilions," pointing to two
    tents, where two great spears stood out, and two shields hung upon two
    trees hard by.

    "I may not tarry, for I am on a quest I needs must follow," said Sir Tor.

    "Thou shalt not pass," replied the dwarf, and therewith blew his horn.
    Then rode out quickly at Sir Tor one armed on horseback, but Sir Tor was
    quick as he, and riding at him bore him from his horse, and made him
    yield. Directly after came another still more fiercely, but with a few
    great strokes and buffets Sir Tor unhorsed him also, and sent them both to
    Camelot to King Arthur. Then came the dwarf and begged Sir Tor to take
    him in his service, "for," said he, "I will serve no more recreant
    knights."

    "Take then a horse, and come with me," said Tor.

    "Ride ye after the knight with the white hound?" said the dwarf; "I can
    soon bring ye where he is."

    So they rode through the forest till they came to two more tents. And Sir
    Tor alighting, went into the first, and saw three damsels lie there,
    sleeping. Then went he to the other, and found another lady also sleeping,
    and at her feet the white hound he sought for, which instantly began to
    bay and bark so loudly, that the lady woke. But Sir Tor had seized the
    hound and given it to the dwarfs charge.

    "What will ye do, Sir knight?" cried out the lady; "will ye take away my
    hound from me by force?"

    "Yea, lady," said Sir Tor; "for so I must, having the king's command; and
    I have followed it from King Arthur's court, at Camelot, to this place."

    "Well" said the lady, "ye will not go far before ye be ill handled, and
    will repent ye of the quest."

    "I shall cheerfully abide whatsoever adventure cometh, by the grace of
    God," said Sir Tor; and so mounted his horse and began to ride back on his
    way. But night coming on, he turned aside to a hermitage that was in the
    forest, and there abode till the next day, making but sorrowful cheer of
    such poor food as the hermit had to give him, and hearing a Mass devoutly
    before he left on the morrow.

    And in the early morning, as he rode forth with the dwarf towards Camelot,
    he heard a knight call loudly after him, "Turn, turn! Abide, Sir knight,
    and yield me up the hound thou tookest from my lady." At which he turned,
    and saw a great and strong knight, armed full splendidly, riding down upon
    him fiercely through a glade of the forest.

    Now Sir Tor was very ill provided, for he had but an old courser, which
    was as weak as himself, because of the hermit's scanty fare. He waited,
    nevertheless, for the strange knight to come, and at the first onset with
    their spears, each unhorsed the other, and then fell to with their swords
    like two mad lions. Then did they smite through one another's shields and
    helmets till the fragments flew on all sides, and their blood ran out in
    streams; but yet they carved and rove through the thick armour of the
    hauberks, and gave each other great and ghastly wounds. But in the end,
    Sir Tor, finding the strange knight faint, doubled his strokes until he
    beat him to the earth. Then did he bid him yield to his mercy.

    "That will I not," replied Abellius, "while my life lasteth and my soul is
    in my body, unless thou give me first the hound."

    "I cannot," said Sir Tor, "and will not, for it was my quest to bring
    again that hound and thee unto King Arthur, or otherwise to slay thee."

    With that there came a damsel riding on a palfrey, as fast as she could
    drive, and cried out to Sir Tor with a loud voice, "I pray thee, for King
    Arthur's love, give me a gift."

    "Ask," said Sir Tor, "and I will give thee."

    "Grammercy," said the lady, "I ask the head of this false knight Abellius,
    the most outrageous murderer that liveth."

    "I repent me of the gift I promised," said Sir Tor. "Let him make thee
    amends for all his trespasses against thee."

    "He cannot make amends," replied the damsel, "for he hath slain my
    brother, a far better knight than he, and scorned to give him mercy,
    though I kneeled for half an hour before him in the mire, to beg it, and
    though it was but by a chance they fought, and for no former injury or
    quarrel. I require my gift of thee as a true knight, or else will I shame
    thee in King Arthur's court; for this Abellius is the falsest knight
    alive, and a murderer of many."

    When Abellius heard this, he trembled greatly, and was sore afraid, and
    yielded to Sir Tor, and prayed his mercy.

    "I cannot now, Sir knight," said he, "lest I be false to my promise. Ye
    would not take my mercy when I offered it; and now it is too late."

    Therewith he unlaced his helmet, and took it off; but Abellius, in dismal
    fear, struggled to his feet, and fled, until Sir Tor overtook him, and
    smote off his head entirely with one blow.

    "Now, sir," said the damsel, "it is near night, I pray ye come and lodge
    at my castle hard by."

    "I will, with a good will," said he, for both his horse and he had fared
    but poorly since they left Camelot.

    So he went to the lady's castle and fared sumptuously, and saw her
    husband, an old knight, who greatly thanked him for his service, and urged
    him oftentimes to come again.

    On the morrow he departed, and reached Camelot by noon, where the king and
    queen rejoiced to see him, and the king made him Earl; and Merlin
    prophesied that these adventures were but little to the things he should
    achieve hereafter.

    Now while Sir Gawain and Sir Tor had fulfilled their quests, King
    Pellinore pursued the lady whom the knight had seized away from the
    wedding-feast. And as he rode through the woods, he saw in a valley a fair
    young damsel sitting by a well-side, and a wounded knight lying in her
    arms, and King Pellinore saluted her as he passed by.

    As soon as she perceived him she cried out, "Help, help me, knight, for
    our Lord's sake!" But Pellinore was far too eager in his quest to stay or
    turn, although she cried a hundred times to him for help; at which she
    prayed to heaven he might have such sore need before he died as she had
    now. And presently thereafter her knight died in her arms; and she, for
    grief and love slew herself with his sword.

    But King Pellinore rode on till he met a poor man and asked him had he
    seen a knight pass by that way leading by force a lady with him.

    "Yea, surely," said the man, "and greatly did she moan and cry; but even
    now another knight is fighting with him to deliver the lady; ride on and
    thou shalt find them fighting still."

    At that King Pellinore rode swiftly on, and came to where he saw the two
    knights fighting, hard by where two pavilions stood. And when he looked in
    one of them he saw the lady that was his quest, and with her the two
    squires of the two knights who fought.

    "Fair lady," said he, "ye must come with me unto Arthur's court."

    "Sir knight," said the two squires, "yonder be two knights fighting for
    this lady; go part them, and get their consent to take her, ere thou touch
    her."

    "Ye say well," said King Pellinore, and rode between the combatants, and
    asked them why they fought.

    "Sir knight," said the one, "yon lady is my cousin, mine aunt's daughter,
    whom I met borne away against her will, by this knight here, with whom I
    therefore fight to free her."

    "Sir knight," replied the other, whose name was Hantzlake of Wentland,
    "this lady got I, by my arms and prowess, at King Arthur's court to-day."

    "That is false," said King Pellinore; "ye stole the lady suddenly, and
    fled away with her, before any knight could arm to stay thee. But it is my
    service to take her back again. Neither of ye shall therefore have her;
    but if ye will fight for her, fight with me now and here."

    "Well," said the knights, "make ready, and we will assail thee with all
    our might."

    Then Sir Hantzlake ran King Pellinore's horse through with his sword, so
    that they might be all alike on foot. But King Pellinore at that was
    passing wroth, and ran upon Sir Hantzlake, with a cry, "Keep well thy
    head!" and gave him such a stroke upon the helm as clove him to the chin,
    so that he fell dead to the ground. When he saw that, the other knight
    refused to fight, and kneeling down said, "Take my cousin the lady with
    thee, as thy quest is; but as thou art a true knight, suffer her to come
    to neither shame nor harm."

    So the next day King Pellinore departed for Camelot, and took the lady
    with him; and as they rode in a valley full of rough stones, the damsel's
    horse stumbled and threw her, so that her arms were sorely bruised and
    hurt. And as they rested in the forest for the pain to lessen, night came
    on, and there they were compelled to make their lodging. A little before
    midnight they heard the trotting of a horse. "Be ye still," said King
    Pellinore, "for now we may hear of some adventure," and therewith he armed
    him. Then he heard two knights meet and salute each other, in the dark;
    one riding from Camelot, the other from the north.

    "What tidings at Camelot?" said one.

    "By my head," said the other, "I have but just left there, and have espied
    King Arthur's court, and such a fellowship is there as never may be broke
    or overcome; for wellnigh all the chivalry of the world is there, and all
    full loyal to the king, and now I ride back homewards to the north to tell
    our chiefs, that they waste not their strength in wars against him."

    "As for all that," replied the other knight, "I am but now from the north,
    and bear with me a remedy, the deadliest poison that ever was heard tell
    of, and to Camelot will I with it; for there we have a friend close to the
    king, and greatly cherished of him, who hath received gifts from us to
    poison him, as he hath promised soon to do."

    "Beware," said the first knight, "of Merlin, for he knoweth all things, by
    the devil's craft."

    "I will not fear for that," replied the other, and so rode on his way.

    Anon King Pellinore and the lady passed on again; and when they came to
    the well at which the lady with the wounded knight had sat, they found
    both knight and Damsel utterly devoured by lions and wild beasts, all save
    the lady's head.

    When King Pellinore saw that, he wept bitterly, saying, "Alas! I might
    have saved her life had I but tarried a few moments in my quest."

    "Wherefore make so much sorrow now?" said the lady.

    "I know not," answered he, "but my heart grieveth greatly for this poor
    lady's death, so fair she was and young."

    Then he required a hermit to bury the remains of the bodies, and bare the
    lady's head with him to Camelot, to the court.

    When he was arrived, he was sworn to tell the truth of his quest before
    the King and Queen, and when he had entered the Queen somewhat upbraided
    him, saying, "Ye were much to blame that ye saved not that lady's life."

    "Madam," said he, "I shall repent it all my life."

    "Ay, king," quoth Merlin, who suddenly came in, "and so ye ought to do,
    for that lady was your daughter, not seen since infancy by thee. And she
    was on her way to court, with a right good young knight, who would have
    been her husband, but was slain by treachery of a felon knight, Lorraine
    le Savage, as they came; and because thou wouldst not abide and help her,
    thy best friend shall fail thee in thine hour of greatest need, for such
    is the penance ordained thee for that deed."

    Then did King Pellinore tell Merlin secretly of the treason he had heard
    in the forest, and Merlin by his craft so ordered that the knight who bare
    the poison was himself soon after slain by it, and so King Arthur's life
    was saved.




    CHAPTER VII

    _King Arthur and Sir Accolon of Gaul_


    Being now happily married, King Arthur for a season took his pleasure,
    with great tournaments, and jousts, and huntings. So once upon a time the
    king and many of his knights rode hunting in a forest, and Arthur, King
    Urience, and Sir Accolon of Gaul, followed after a great hart, and being
    all three well mounted, they chased so fast that they outsped their
    company, and left them many miles behind; but riding still as rapidly as
    they could go, at length their horses fell dead under them. Then being all
    three on foot, and seeing the stag not far before them, very weary and
    nigh spent - "What shall we do," said King Arthur, "for we are hard
    bested?" "Let us go on afoot," said King Urience, "till we can find some
    lodging." At that they saw the stag lying upon the bank of a great lake,
    with a hound springing at his throat, and many other hounds trooping
    towards him. So, running forward, Arthur blew the death-note on his horn,
    and slew the hart. Then lifting up his eyes he saw before him on the lake
    a barge, all draped down to the water's edge, with silken folds and
    curtains, which swiftly came towards him, and touched upon the sands; but
    when he went up close and looked in, he saw no earthly creature. Then he
    cried out to his companions, "Sirs, come ye hither, and let us see what
    there is in this ship." So they all three went in, and found it everywhere
    throughout furnished, and hung with rich draperies of silk and gold.

    By this time eventide had come, when suddenly a hundred torches were set
    up on all sides of the barge, and gave a dazzling light, and at the same
    time came forth twelve fair damsels, and saluted King Arthur by his name,
    kneeling on their knees, and telling him that he was welcome, and should
    have their noblest cheer, for which the king thanked them courteously.
    Then did they lead him and his fellows to a splendid chamber, where was a
    table spread with all the richest furniture, and costliest wines and
    viands; and there they served them with all kinds of wines and meats, till
    Arthur wondered at the splendour of the feast, declaring he had never in
    his life supped better, or more royally. After supper they led him to
    another chamber, than which he had never beheld a richer, where he was
    left to rest. King Urience, also, and Sir Accolon were each conducted into
    rooms of like magnificence. And so they all three fell asleep, and being
    very weary slept deeply all that night.

    [Illustration: Came forth twelve fair damsels, and saluted King Arthur by
    his name.]

    But when the morning broke, King Urience found himself in his own house in
    Camelot, he knew not how; and Arthur awaking found himself in a dark
    dungeon, and heard around him nothing but the groans of woful knights,
    prisoners like himself. Then said King Arthur, "Who are ye, thus groaning
    and complaining?" And some one answered him, "Alas, we be all prisoners,
    even twenty good knights, and some of us have lain here seven years - some
    more - nor seen the light of day for all that time." "For what cause?" said
    King Arthur. "Know ye not then yourself?" they answered - "we will soon
    tell you. The lord of this strong castle is Sir Damas, and is the falsest
    and most traitorous knight that liveth; and he hath a younger brother, a
    good and noble knight, whose name is Outzlake. This traitor Damas,
    although passing rich, will give his brother nothing of his wealth, and
    save what Outzlake keepeth to himself by force, he hath no share of the
    inheritance. He owneth, nevertheless, one fair rich manor, whereupon he
    liveth, loved of all men far and near. But Damas is as altogether hated as
    his brother is beloved, for he is merciless and cowardly: and now for many
    years there hath been war between these brothers, and Sir Outzlake
    evermore defieth Damas to come forth and fight with him, body to body, for
    the inheritance; and if he be too cowardly, to find some champion knight
    that will fight for him. And Damas hath agreed to find some champion, but
    never yet hath found a knight to take his evil cause in hand, or wager
    battle for him. So with a strong band of men-at-arms he lieth ever in
    ambush, and taketh captive every passing knight who may unwarily go near,
    and bringeth him into this castle, and desireth him either to fight Sir
    Outzlake, or to lie for evermore in durance. And thus hath he dealt with
    all of us, for we all scorned to take up such a cause for such a false
    foul knight - but rather one by one came here, where many a good knight
    hath died of hunger and disease. But if one of us would fight, Sir Damas
    would deliver all the rest."

    "God of his mercy send you deliverance," said King Arthur, and sat
    turning in his mind how all these things should end, and how he might
    himself gain freedom for so many noble hearts.

    Anon there came a damsel to the king, saying, "Sir if thou wilt fight for
    my lord thou shalt be delivered out of prison, but else nevermore shalt
    thou escape with thy life." "Nay," said King Arthur, "that is but a hard
    choice, yet had I rather fight than die in prison, and if I may deliver
    not myself alone, but all these others, I will do the battle." "Yea," said
    the damsel, "it shall be even so." "Then," said King Arthur, "I am ready
    now, if but I had a horse and armour." "Fear not," said she, "that shalt
    thou have presently, and shalt lack nothing proper for the fight." "Have I
    not seen thee," said the king, "at King Arthur's court? for it seemeth
    that thy face is known to me." "Nay," said the damsel, "I was never there;
    I am Sir Damas' daughter, and have never been but a day's journey from
    this castle." But she spoke falsely, for she was one of the damsels of
    Morgan le Fay, the great enchantress, who was King Arthur's half-sister.

    When Sir Damas knew that there had been at length a knight found who would
    fight for him, he sent for Arthur, and finding him a man so tall and
    strong, and straight of limb, he was passingly well pleased, and made a
    covenant with him, that he should fight unto the uttermost for his cause,
    and that all the other knights should be delivered. And when they were
    sworn to each other on the holy gospels, all those imprisoned knights were
    straightway led forth and delivered, but abode there one and all to see
    the battle.

    In the meanwhile there had happened to Sir Accolon of Gaul a strange
    adventure; for when he awoke from his deep sleep upon the silken barge, he
    found himself upon the edge of a deep well, and in instant peril of
    falling thereinto. Whereat, leaping up in great affright, he crossed
    himself and cried aloud, "May God preserve my lord King Arthur and King
    Urience, for those damsels in the ship have betrayed us, and were
    doubtless devils and no women; and if I may escape this misadventure, I
    will certainly destroy them wheresoever I may find them." With that there
    came to him a dwarf with a great mouth, and a flat nose, and saluted him,
    saying that he came from Queen Morgan le Fay. "And she greeteth you well,"
    said he, "and biddeth you be strong of heart, for to-morrow you shall do
    battle with a strange knight, and therefore she hath sent you here
    Excalibur, King Arthur's sword, and the scabbard likewise. And she
    desireth you as you do love her to fight this battle to the uttermost, and
    without any mercy, as you have promised her you would fight when she
    should require it of you; and she will make a rich queen for ever of any
    damsel that shall bring her that knight's head with whom you are to
    fight."

    "Well," said Sir Accolon, "tell you my lady Queen Morgan, that I shall
    hold to that I promised her, now that I have this sword - and," said he, "I
    suppose it was to bring about this battle that she made all these
    enchantments by her craft." "You have guessed rightly," said the dwarf,
    and therewithal he left him.

    Then came a knight and lady, and six squires, to Sir Accolon, and took him
    to a manor house hard by, and gave him noble cheer; and the house belonged
    to Sir Outzlake, the brother of Sir Damas, for so had Morgan le Fay
    contrived with her enchantments. Now Sir Outzlake himself was at that time
    sorely wounded and disabled, having been pierced through both his thighs
    by a spear-thrust. When, therefore, Sir Damas sent down messengers to his
    brother, bidding him make ready by to-morrow morning, and be in the field
    to fight with a good knight, for that he had found a champion ready to do
    battle at all points, Sir Outzlake was sorely annoyed and distressed, for
    he knew he had small chance of victory, while yet he was disabled by his
    wounds; notwithstanding, he determined to take the battle in hand,
    although he was so weak that he must needs be lifted to his saddle. But
    when Sir Accolon of Gaul heard this, he sent a message to Sir Outzlake
    offering to take the battle in his stead, which cheered Sir Outzlake
    mightily, who thanked Sir Accolon with all his heart, and joyfully
    accepted him.

    So, on the morrow, King Arthur was armed and well horsed, and asked Sir
    Damas, "When shall we go to the field?" "Sir," said Sir Damas, "you shall
    first hear mass." And when mass was done, there came a squire on a great
    horse, and asked Sir Damas if his knight were ready, "for our knight is
    already in the field." Then King Arthur mounted on horseback, and there
    around were all the knights, and barons, and people of the country; and
    twelve of them were chosen to wait upon the two knights who were about to
    fight. And as King Arthur sat on horseback, there came a damsel from
    Morgan le Fay, and brought to him a sword, made like Excalibur, and a
    scabbard also, and said to him, "Morgan le Fay sendeth you here your sword
    for her great love's sake." And the king thanked her, and believed it to
    be as she said; but she traitorously deceived him, for both sword and
    scabbard were counterfeit, brittle, and false, and the true sword
    Excalibur was in the hands of Sir Accolon. Then, at the sound of a
    trumpet, the champions set themselves on opposite sides of the field, and
    giving rein and spur to their horses urged them to so great a speed that
    each smiting the other in the middle of the shield, rolled his opponent to
    the ground, both horse and man. Then starting up immediately, both drew
    their swords and rushed swiftly together. And so they fell to eagerly, and
    gave each other many great and mighty strokes.

    And as they were thus fighting, the damsel Vivien, lady of the lake, who
    loved King Arthur, came upon the ground, for she knew by her enchantments
    how Morgan le Fay had craftily devised to have King Arthur slain by his
    own sword that day, and therefore came to save his life. And Arthur and
    Sir Accolon were now grown hot against each other, and spared not strength
    nor fury in their fierce assaults; but the king's sword gave way
    continually before Sir Accolon's, so that at every stroke he was sore
    wounded, and his blood ran from him so fast that it was a marvel he could
    stand. When King Arthur saw the ground so sore be-blooded, he bethought
    him in dismay that there was magic treason worked upon him, and that his
    own true sword was changed, for it seemed to him that the sword in Sir
    Accolon's hand was Excalibur, for fearfully it drew his blood at every
    blow, while what he held himself kept no sharp edge, nor fell with any
    force upon his foe.

    "Now, knight, look to thyself, and keep thee well from me," cried out Sir
    Accolon. But King Arthur answered not, and gave him such a buffet on the
    helm as made him stagger and nigh fall upon the ground. Then Sir Accolon
    withdrew a little, and came on with Excalibur on high, and smote King
    Arthur in return with such a mighty stroke as almost felled him; and both
    being now in hottest wrath, they gave each other grievous and savage
    blows. But Arthur all the time was losing so much blood that scarcely
    could he keep upon his feet yet so full was he of knighthood, that
    knightly he endured the pain, and still sustained himself, though now he
    was so feeble that he thought himself about to die. Sir Accolon, as yet,
    had lost no drop of blood, and being very bold and confident in Excalibur,
    even grew more vigorous and hasty in his assaults. But all men who beheld
    them said they never saw a knight fight half so well as did King Arthur;
    and all the people were so grieved for him that they besought Sir Damas
    and Sir Outzlake to make up their quarrel and so stay the fight; but they
    would not.

    So still the battle raged, till Arthur drew a little back for breath and a
    few moments' rest; but Accolon came on after him, following fiercely and
    crying loud, "It is no time for me to suffer thee to rest," and therewith
    set upon him. Then Arthur, full of scorn and rage, lifted up his sword and
    struck Sir Accolon upon the helm so mightily that he drove him to his
    knees; but with the force of that great stroke his brittle, treacherous
    sword broke short off at the hilt, and fell down in the grass among the
    blood, leaving the pommel only in his hand. At that, King Arthur thought
    within himself that all was over, and secretly prepared his mind for
    death, yet kept himself so knightly sheltered by his shield that he lost
    no ground, and made as though he yet had hope and cheer. Then said Sir
    Accolon, "Sir knight, thou now art overcome and canst endure no longer,
    seeing thou art weaponless, and hast lost already so much blood. Yet am I
    fully loth to slay thee; yield, then, therefore, to me as recreant."
    "Nay," said King Arthur, "that may I not, for I have promised to do battle
    to the uttermost by the faith of my body while my life lasteth; and I had
    rather die with honour than live with shame; and if it were possible for
    me to die an hundred times, I had rather die as often than yield me to
    thee, for though I lack weapons, I shall lack no worship, and it shall be
    to thy shame to slay me weaponless." "Aha," shouted then Sir Accolon, "as
    for the shame, I will not spare; look to thyself, sir knight, for thou art
    even now but a dead man." Therewith he drove at him with pitiless force,
    and struck him nearly down; but Arthur evermore waxing in valour as he
    waned in blood, pressed on Sir Accolon with his shield, and hit at him so
    fiercely with the pommel in his hand, as hurled him three strides
    backwards.

    This, therefore, so confused Sir Accolon, that rushing up, all dizzy, to
    deliver once again a furious blow, even as he struck, Excalibur, by
    Vivien's magic, fell from out his hands upon the earth. Beholding which,
    King Arthur lightly sprang to it, and grasped it, and forthwith felt it
    was his own good sword, and said to it, "Thou hast been from me all too
    long, and done me too much damage." Then spying the scabbard hanging by
    Sir Accolon's side, he sprang and pulled it from him, and cast it away as
    far as he could throw it; for so long as he had worn it, Arthur new his
    life would have been kept secure. "Oh, knight!" then said the king, "thou
    hast this day wrought me much damage by this sword, but now art thou come
    to thy death, for I shall not warrant thee but that thou shalt suffer, ere
    we part, somewhat of that thou hast made me suffer." And therewithal King
    Arthur flew at him with all his might, and pulled him to the earth, and
    then struck off his helm, and gave him on the head a fearful buffet, till
    the blood leaped forth. "Now will I slay thee!" cried King Arthur; for his
    heart was hardened, and his body all on fire with fever, till for a moment
    he forgot his knightly mercy. "Slay me thou mayest," said Sir Accolon,
    "for thou art the best knight I ever found, and I see well that God is
    with thee; and I, as thou hast, have promised to fight this battle to the
    uttermost, and never to be recreant while I live; therefore shall I never
    yield me with my mouth, and God must do with my body what he will." And as
    Sir Accolon spoke, King Arthur thought he knew his voice; and parting all
    his blood-stained hair from out his eyes, and leaning down towards him,
    saw, indeed, it was his friend and own true knight. Then said he - keeping
    his own visor down - "I pray thee tell me of what country art thou, and
    what court?" "Sir knight," he answered, "I am of King Arthur's court, and
    my name is Sir Accolon of Gaul." Then said the king, "Oh, sir knight! I
    pray thee tell me who gave thee this sword? and from whom thou hadst it?"

    Then said Sir Accolon, "Woe worth this sword, for by it I have gotten my
    death. This sword hath been in my keeping now for almost twelve months,
    and yesterday Queen Morgan le Fay, wife of King Urience, sent it to me by
    a dwarf, that therewith I might in some way slay her brother, King Arthur;
    for thou must understand that King Arthur is the man she hateth most in
    all the world, being full of envy and jealousy because he is of greater
    worship and renown than any other of her blood. She loveth me also as much
    as she doth hate him; and if she might contrive to slay King Arthur by her
    craft and magic, then would she straightway kill her husband also, and
    make me the king of all this land, and herself my queen, to reign with me;
    but now," said he, "all that is over, for this day I am come to my death."

    "It would have been sore treason of thee to destroy thy lord," said
    Arthur. "Thou sayest truly," answered he; "but now that I have told thee,
    and openly confessed to thee all that foul treason whereof I now do
    bitterly repent, tell me, I pray thee, whence art thou, and of what
    court?" "O, Sir Accolon!" said King Arthur, "learn that I am myself King
    Arthur." When Sir Accolon heard this he cried aloud, "Alas, my gracious
    lord! have mercy on me, for I knew thee not." "Thou shalt have mercy,"
    said he, "for thou knewest not my person at this time; and though by thine
    own confession thou art a traitor, yet do I blame thee less, because thou
    hast been blinded by the false crafts of my sister Morgan le Fay, whom I
    have trusted more than all others of my kin, and whom I now shall know
    well how to punish." Then did Sir Accolon cry loudly, "O, lords, and all
    good people! this noble knight that I have fought with is the noblest and
    most worshipful in all the world; for it is King Arthur, our liege lord
    and sovereign king; and full sorely I repent that I have ever lifted lance
    against him, though in ignorance I did it."

    Then all the people fell down on their knees and prayed the pardon of the
    king for suffering him to come to such a strait. But he replied, "Pardon
    ye cannot have, for, truly, ye have nothing sinned; but here ye see what
    ill adventure may ofttimes befall knights-errant, for to my own hurt, and
    his danger also, I have fought with one of my own knights."

    Then the king commanded Sir Damas to surrender to his brother the whole
    manor, Sir Outzlake only yielding him a palfrey every year; "for," said he
    scornfully, "it would become thee better to ride on than a courser;" and
    ordered Damas, upon pain of death, never again to touch or to distress
    knights-errant riding on their adventures; and also to make full
    compensation and satisfaction to the twenty knights whom he had held in
    prison. "And if any of them," said the king, "come to my court complaining
    that he hath not had full satisfaction of thee for his injuries, by my
    head, thou shalt die therefor."

    Afterwards, King Arthur asked Sir Outzlake to come with him to his court,
    where he should become a knight of his, and, if his deeds were noble, be
    advanced to all he might desire.

    So then he took his leave of all the people and mounted upon horseback,
    and Sir Accolon went with him to an abbey hard by, where both their wounds
    were dressed. But Sir Accolon died within four days after. And when he was
    dead, the king sent his body to Queen Morgan, to Camelot, saying that he
    sent her a present in return for the sword Excalibur which she had sent
    him by the damsel.

    So, on the morrow, there came a damsel from Queen Morgan to the king, and
    brought with her the richest mantle that ever was seen, for it was set as
    full of precious stones as they could stand against each other, and they
    were the richest stones that ever the king saw. And the damsel said, "Your
    sister sendeth you this mantle, and prayeth you to take her gift, and in
    whatsoever thing she hath offended you, she will amend it at your
    pleasure." To this the king replied not, although the mantle pleased him
    much. With that came in the lady of the lake, and said, "Sir, put not on
    this mantle till thou hast seen more; and in nowise let it be put upon
    thee, or any of thy knights, till ye have made the bringer of it first put
    it on her." "It shall be done as thou dost counsel," said the king. Then
    said he to the damsel that came from his sister, "Damsel, I would see this
    mantle ye have brought me upon yourself." "Sir," said she, "it will not
    beseem me to wear a knight's garment." "By my head," said King Arthur,
    "thou shall wear it ere it go on any other person's back!" And so they put
    it on her by force, and forthwith the garment burst into a flame and
    burned the damsel into cinders. When the king saw that, he hated that
    false witch Morgan le Fay with all his heart, and evermore was deadly
    quarrel between her and Arthur to their lives' end.




    CHAPTER VIII

    _King Arthur conquers Rome, and is crowned Emperor_


    And now again the second time there came ambassadors from Lucius Tiberius,
    Emperor of Rome, demanding, under pain of war, tribute and homage from
    King Arthur, and the restoration of all Gaul, which he had conquered from
    the tribune Flollo.

    When they had delivered their message, the king bade them withdraw while
    he consulted with his knights and barons what reply to send. Then some of
    the younger knights would have slain the ambassadors, saying that their
    speech was a rebuke to all who heard the king insulted by it. But when
    King Arthur heard that, he ordered none to touch them upon pain of death;
    and sending officers, he had them taken to a noble lodging, and there
    entertained with the best cheer. "And," said he, "let no dainty be spared,
    for the Romans are great lords; and though their message please me not,
    yet must I remember mine honour."

    Then the lords and knights of the Round Table were called on to declare
    their counsel - what should be done upon this matter; and Sir Cador of
    Cornwall speaking first, said, "Sir, this message is the best news I have
    heard for a long time, for we have been now idle and at rest for many
    days, and I trust that thou wilt make sharp war upon the Romans, wherein,
    I doubt not, we shall all gain honour."

    "I believe well," said Arthur, "that thou art pleased, Sir Cador; but that
    is scarce an answer to the Emperor of Rome, and his demand doth grieve me
    sorely, for truly I will never pay him tribute; wherefore, lords, I pray
    ye counsel me. Now, I have understood that Belinus and Brennius, knights
    of Britain, held the Roman Empire in their hands for many days, and also
    Constantine, the son of Helen, which is open evidence, not only that we
    owe Rome no tribute, but that I, being descended from them, may, of right,
    myself claim the empire."

    Then said King Anguish of Scotland, "Sir, thou oughtest of right to be
    above all other kings, for in all Christendom is there not thine equal;
    and I counsel thee never to obey the Romans. For when they reigned here
    they grievously distressed us, and put the land to great and heavy
    burdens; and here, for my part, I swear to avenge me on them when I may,
    and will furnish thee with twenty thousand men-at-arms, whom I will pay
    and keep, and who shall wait on thee with me, when it shall please thee."

    Then the King of Little Britain rose and promised King Arthur thirty
    thousand men; and likewise many other kings, and dukes, and barons,
    promised aid - as the lord of West Wales thirty thousand men, Sir Ewaine
    and his cousin thirty thousand men, and so forth; Sir Lancelot also, and
    every other knight of the Round Table, promised each man a great host.

    So the king, passing joyful at their courage and good will, thanked them
    all heartily, and sent for the ambassadors again, to hear his answer. "I
    will," said he, "that ye now go back straightway unto the Emperor your
    master and tell him that I give no heed to his words, for I have conquered
    all my kingdoms by the will of God and by my own right arm, and I am
    strong enough to keep them, without paying tribute to any earthly
    creature. But, on the other hand, I claim both tribute and submission from
    himself, and also claim the sovereignty of all his empire, whereto I am
    entitled by the right of my own ancestors - sometime kings of this land.
    And say to him that I will shortly come to Rome, and by God's grace will
    take possession of my empire and subdue all rebels. Wherefore, lastly, I
    command him and all the lords of Rome that they forthwith pay me their
    homage, under pain of my chastisement and wrath."

    Then he commanded his treasurers to give the ambassadors great gifts, and
    defray all their charges, and appointed Sir Cador to convey them
    worshipfully out of the land.

    So when they returned to Rome and came before Lucius, he was sore angry at
    their words, and said, "I thought this Arthur would have instantly obeyed
    my orders and have served me as humbly as any other king; but because of
    his fortune in Gaul, he hath grown insolent."

    "Ah, lord," said one of the ambassadors, "refrain from such vain words,
    for truly I and all with me were fearful at his royal majesty and angry
    countenance. I fear me thou hast made a rod for thee more sharp than thou
    hast counted on. He meaneth to be master of this empire; and is another
    kind of man than thou supposest, and holdeth the most noble court of all
    the world. We saw him on the new year's day, served at his table by nine
    kings, and the noblest company of other princes, lords, and knights that
    ever was in all the world; and in his person he is the most manly-seeming
    man that liveth, and looketh like to conquer all the earth."

    Then Lucius sent messengers to all the subject countries of Rome, and
    brought together a mighty army, and assembled sixteen kings, and many
    dukes, princes, lords, and admirals, and a wondrous great multitude of
    people. Fifty giants also, born of fiends, were set around him for a
    body-guard. With all that host he straightway went from Rome, and passed
    beyond the mountains into Gaul, and burned the towns and ravaged all the
    country of that province, in rage for its submission to King Arthur. Then
    he moved on towards Little Britain.

    Meanwhile, King Arthur having held a parliament at York, left the realm in
    charge of Sir Badewine and Sir Constantine, and crossed the sea from
    Sandwich to meet Lucius. And so soon as he was landed, he sent Sir Gawain,
    Sir Bors, Sir Lionel, and Sir Bedivere to the Emperor, commanding him "to
    move swiftly and in haste out of his land, and, if not, to make himself
    ready for battle, and not continue ravaging the country and slaying
    harmless people." Anon, those noble knights attired themselves and set
    forth on horseback to where they saw, in a meadow, many silken tents of
    divers colours, and the Emperor's pavilion in the midst, with a golden
    eagle set above it.

    Then Sir Gawain and Sir Bors rode forward, leaving the other two behind
    in ambush, and gave King Arthur's message. To which the Emperor replied,
    "Return, and tell your lord that I am come to conquer him and all his
    land."

    At this, Sir Gawain burned with anger, and cried out, "I had rather than
    all France that I might fight with thee alone!"

    "And I also," said Sir Bors.

    Then a knight named Ganius, a near cousin of the Emperor, laughed out
    aloud, and said, "Lo! how these Britons boast and are full of pride,
    bragging as though they bare up all the world!"

    At these words, Sir Gawain could refrain no longer, but drew forth his
    sword and with one blow shore oft Ganius' head; then with Sir Bors, he
    turned his horse and rode over waters and through woods, back to the
    ambush, where Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere were waiting. The Romans
    followed fast behind them till the knights turned and stood, and then Sir
    Bors smote the foremost of them through the body with a spear, and slew
    him on the spot. Then came on Calibere, a huge Pavian, but Sir Bors
    overthrew him also. And then the company of Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere
    brake from their ambush and fell on the Romans, and slew and hewed them
    down, and forced them to return and flee, chasing them to their tents.

    But as they neared the camp, a great host more rushed forth, and turned
    the battle backwards, and in the turmoil, Sir Bors and Sir Berel fell into
    the Romans' hands. When Sir Gawain saw that, he drew his good sword
    Galotine, and swore to see King Arthur's face no more if those two knights
    were not delivered; and then, with good Sir Idrus, made so sore an
    onslaught that the Romans fled and left Sir Bors and Sir Berel to their
    friends. So the Britons returned in triumph to King Arthur, having slain
    more than ten thousand Romans, and lost no man of worship from amongst
    themselves.

    When the Emperor Lucius heard of that discomfiture he arose, with all his
    army, to crush King Arthur, and met him in the vale of Soissons. Then
    speaking to all his host, he said, "Sirs, I admonish you that this day ye
    fight and acquit yourselves as men; and remembering how Rome is chief of
    all the earth, and mistress of the universal world, suffer not these
    barbarous and savage Britons to abide our onset." At that, the trumpets
    blew so loud, that the ground trembled and shook.

    Then did the rival hosts draw near each other with great shoutings; and
    when they closed, no tongue can tell the fury of their smiting, and the
    sore struggling, wounds, and slaughter. Then King Arthur, with his
    mightiest knights, rode down into the thickest of the fight, and drew
    Excalibur, and slew as lightning slays for swiftness and for force. And in
    the midmost crowd he met a giant, Galapas by name, and struck off both his
    legs at the knee-joints; then saying, "Now art thou a better size to deal
    with!" smote his head off at a second blow: and the body killed six men in
    falling down.

    Anon, King Arthur spied where Lucius fought and worked great deeds of
    prowess with his own hands. Forthwith he rode at him, and each attacked
    the other passing fiercely; till at the last, Lucius struck King Arthur
    with a fearful wound across the face, and Arthur, in return, lifting up
    Excalibur on high, drove it with all his force upon the Emperor's head,
    shivering his helmet, crashing his head in halves, and splitting his body
    to the breast. And when the Romans saw their Emperor dead they fled in
    hosts of thousands; and King Arthur and his knights, and all his army
    followed them, and slew one hundred thousand men.

    Then returning to the field, King Arthur rode to the place where Lucius
    lay dead, and round him the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia, and seventeen
    other kings, with sixty Roman senators, all noble men. All these he
    ordered to be carefully embalmed with aromatic gums, and laid in leaden
    coffins, covered with their shields and arms and banners. Then calling for
    three senators who were taken prisoners, he said to them, "As the ransom
    of your lives, I will that ye take these dead bodies and carry them to
    Rome, and there present them for me, with these letters saying I will
    myself be shortly there. And I suppose the Romans will beware how they
    again ask tribute of me; for tell them, these dead bodies that I send them
    are for the tribute they have dared to ask of me; and if they wish for
    more, when I come I will pay them the rest."

    So, with that charge, the three senators departed with the dead bodies,
    and went to Rome; the body of the Emperor being carried in a chariot
    blazoned with the arms of the empire, all alone, and the bodies of the
    kings two and two in chariots following.

    After the battle, King Arthur entered Lorraine, Brabant, and Flanders, and
    thence, subduing all the countries as he went, passed into Germany, and so
    beyond the mountains into Lombardy and Tuscany. At length he came before a
    city which refused to obey him, wherefore he sat down before it to besiege
    it. And after a long time thus spent, King Arthur called Sir Florence,
    and told him they began to lack food for his hosts - "And not far from
    hence," said he, "are great forests full of cattle belonging to my
    enemies. Go then, and bring by force all that thou canst find; and take
    with thee Sir Gawain, my nephew, and Sir Clegis, Sir Claremond the Captain
    of Cardiff, and a strong band."

    Anon, those knights made ready, and rode over holts and hills, and through
    forests and woods, till they came to a great meadow full of fair flowers
    and grass, and there they rested themselves and their horses that night.
    And at the dawn of the next day, Sir Gawain took his horse and rode away
    from his fellows to seek some adventure. Soon he saw an armed knight
    walking his horse by a wood's side, with his shield laced to his shoulder,
    and no attendant with him save a page, bearing a mighty spear; and on his
    shield were blazoned three gold griffins. When Sir Gawain spied him, he
    put his spear in rest, and riding straight to him, asked who he was. "A
    Tuscan," said he; "and they mayest prove me when thou wilt, for thou shalt
    be my prisoner ere we part."

    Then said Sir Gawain, "Thou vauntest thee greatly, and speakest proud
    words; yet I counsel thee, for all thy boastings, look to thyself the best
    thou canst."

    At that they took their spears and ran at each other with all the might
    they had, and smote each other through their shields into their shoulders;
    and then drawing swords smote with great strokes, till the fire sprang out
    of their helms. Then was Sir Gawain enraged, and with his good sword
    Galotine struck his enerny through shield and hauberk, and splintered into
    pieces all the precious stones of it, and made so huge a wound that men
    might see both lungs and liver. At that the Tuscan, groaning loudly,
    rushed on to Sir Gawain, and gave him a deep slanting stroke, and made a
    mighty wound and cut a great vein asunder, so that he bled fast. Then he
    cried out, "Bind thy wound quickly up, Sir knight, for thou be-bloodest
    all thy horse and thy fair armour, and all the surgeons of the world shall
    never staunch thy blood; for so shall it be to whomsoever is hurt with
    this good sword."

    Then answered Sir Gawain, "It grieveth me but little, and thy boastful
    words give me no fear, for thou shalt suffer greater grief and sorrow ere
    we part; but tell me quickly who can staunch this blood."

    "That can I do," said the strange knight, "and will, if thou wilt aid and
    succour me to become christened, and to believe on God, which now I do
    require of thee upon thy manhood."

    "I am content," said Sir Gawain; "and may God help me to grant all thy
    wishes. But tell mefirst, what soughtest thou thus here alone, and of what
    land art thou?"

    "Sir," said the knight, "my name is Prianius, and my father is a great
    prince, who hath rebelled against Rome. He is descended from Alexander and
    Hector, and of our lineage also were Joshua and Maccabaeus. I am of right
    the king of Alexandria, and Africa, and all the outer isles, yet I would
    believe in the Lord thou worshippest, and for thy labour I will give thee
    treasure enough. I was so proud in heart that I thought none my equal, but
    now have I encountered with thee, who hast given me my fill of fighting;
    wherefore, I pray thee, Sir knight, tell me of thyself."

    "I am no knight," said Sir Gawain; "I have been brought up many years in
    the wardrobe of the noble prince King Arthur, to mind his armour and
    array."

    "Ah," said Prianius, "if his varlets be so keen and fierce, his knights
    must be passing good! Now, for the love of heaven, whether thou be knight
    or knave, tell me thy name."

    "By heaven!" said Gawain, "now will I tell thee the truth. My name is Sir
    Gawain, and I am a knight of the Round Table."

    "Now am I better pleased," said Prianius, "than if thou hadst given me all
    the province of Paris the rich. I had rather have been torn by wild horses
    than that any varlet should have won such victory over me as thou hast
    done. But now, Sir knight, I warn thee that close by is the Duke of
    Lorraine, with sixty thousand good men of war; and we had both best flee
    at once, for he will find us else, and we be sorely wounded and never
    likely to recover. And let my page be careful that he blow no horn, for
    hard by are a hundred knights, my servants; and if they seize thee, no
    ransom of gold or silver would acquit thee."

    Then Sir Gawain rode over a river to save himself, and Sir Prianius after
    him, and so they both fled till they came to his companions who were in
    the meadow, where they spent the night. When Sir Whishard saw Sir Gawain
    so hurt, he ran to him weeping, and asked him who it was had wounded him;
    and Sir Gawain told him how he had fought with that man - pointing to
    Prianius - who had salves to heal them both. "But I can tell ye other
    tidings," said he - "that soon we must encounter many enemies, for a great
    army is close to us in our front."

    Then Prianius and Sir Gawain alighted and let their horses graze while
    they unarmed, and when they took their armour and their clothing off, the
    hot blood ran down freshly from their wounds till it was piteous to see.
    But Prianius took from his page a vial filled from the four rivers that
    flow out of Paradise, and anointed both their wounds with a certain balm,
    and washed them with that water, and within an hour afterwards they were
    both as sound and whole as ever they had been. Then, at the sound of a
    trumpet, all the knights were assembled to council; and after much
    talking, Prianius said, "Cease your words, for I warn you in yonder wood
    ye shall find knights out of number, who will put out cattle for a decoy
    to lead you on; and ye are not seven hundred!"

    "Nevertheless," said Sir Gawain, "let us at once encounter them, and see
    what they can do; and may the best have the victory."

    Then they saw suddenly an earl named Sir Ethelwold, and the Duke of
    Duchmen come leaping out of ambush of the woods in front, with many a
    thousand after them, and all rode straight down to the battle. And Sir
    Gawain, full of ardour and courage, comforted his knights, saying, "They
    all are ours." Then the seven hundred knights, in one close company, set
    spurs to their horses and began to gallop, and fiercely met their enemies.
    And then were men and horses slain and overthrown on every side, and in
    and out amidst them all, the knights of the Round Table pressed and
    thrust, and smote down to the earth all who withstood them, till at length
    the whole of them turned back and fled.

    "By heaven!" said Sir Gawain, "this gladdeneth well my heart, for now
    behold them as they flee! they are full seventy thousand less in number
    than they were an hour ago!"

    Thus was the battle quickly ended, and a great host of high lords and
    knights of Lombardy and Saracens left dead upon the field. Then Sir Gawain
    and his company collected a great plenty of cattle, and of gold and
    silver, and all kind of treasure, and returned to King Arthur, where he
    still kept the siege.

    "Now God be thanked," cried he; "but who is he that standeth yonder by
    himself, and seemeth not a prisoner?"

    "Sir," said Sir Gawain, "he is a good man with his weapons, and hath
    matched me; but cometh hither to be made a Christian. Had it not been for
    his warnings, we none of us should have been here this day. I pray thee,
    therefore, let him be baptized, for there can be few nobler men, or better
    knights."

    So Prianius was christened, and made a duke and knight of the Round Table.

    [Illustration: Prianius was christened, and made a duke and knight of the
    Round Table.]

    Presently afterwards, they made a last attack upon the city, and entered
    by the walls on every side; and as the men were rushing to the pillage,
    came the Duchess forth, with many ladies and damsels, and kneeled before
    King Arthur; and besought him to receive their submission. To whom the
    king made answer, with a noble countenance, "Madam, be well assured that
    none shall harm ye, or your ladies; neither shall any that belong to thee
    be hurt; but the Duke must abide my judgment." Then he commanded to stay
    the assault and took the keys from the Duke's eldest son, who brought them
    kneeling. Anon the Duke was sent a prisoner to Dover for his life, and
    rents and taxes were assigned for dowry of the Duchess and her children.

    Then went he on with all his hosts, winning all towns and castles, and
    wasting them that refused obedience, till he came to Viterbo. From thence
    he sent to Rome, to ask the senators whether they would receive him for
    their lord and governor. In answer, came out to him all the Senate who
    remained alive, and the Cardinals, with a majestic retinue and procession;
    and laying great treasures at his feet, they prayed him to come in at once
    to Rome, and there be peaceably crowned as Emperor. "At this next
    Christmas," said King Arthur, "will I be crowned, and hold my Round Table
    in your city."

    Anon he entered Rome, in mighty pomp and state; and after him came all his
    hosts, and his knights, and princes, and great lords, arrayed in gold and
    jewels, such as never were beheld before. And then was he crowned Emperor
    by the Pope's hands, with all the highest solemnity that could be made.

    Then after his coronation, he abode in Rome for a season, settling his
    lands and giving kingdoms to his knights and servants, to each one after
    his deserving, and in such wise fashion that no man among them all
    complained. Also he made many dukes and earls, and loaded all his
    men-at-arms with riches and great treasures.

    When all this was done, the lords and knights, and all the men of great
    estate, came together before him, and said, "Noble Emperor! by the
    blessing of Eternal God, thy mortal warfare is all finished, and thy
    conquests all achieved; for now in all the world is none so great and
    mighty as to dare make war with thee. Wherefore we beseech and heartily
    pray thee of thy noble grace, to turn thee homeward, and to give us also
    leave to see our wives and homes again, for now we have been from them a
    long season, and all thy journey is completed with great honour and
    worship."

    "Ye say well," replied he, "and to tempt God is no wisdom; therefore make
    ready in all haste, and turn we home to England."

    So King Arthur returned with his knights and lords and armies, in great
    triumph and joy, through all the countries he had conquered, and commanded
    that no man, upon pain of death, should rob or do any violence by the way.
    And crossing the sea, he came at length to Sandwich, where Queen Guinevere
    received him, and made great joy at his arrival. And through all the realm
    of Britain was there such rejoicing as no tongue can tell.




    CHAPTER IX

    _The Adventures of Sir Lancelot du Lake_


    Then, at the following Pentecost, was held a feast of the Round Table at
    Caerleon, with high splendour; and all the knights thereof resorted to the
    court, and held many games and jousts. And therein Sir Lancelot increased
    in fame and worship above all men, for he overthrew all comers, and never
    was unhorsed or worsted, save by treason and enchantment.

    When Queen Guinevere had seen his wondrous feats, she held him in great
    favour, and smiled more on him than on any other knight. And ever since he
    first had gone to bring her to King Arthur, had Lancelot thought on her as
    fairest of all ladies, and done his best to win her grace. So the queen
    often sent for him, and bade him tell of his birth and strange adventures:
    how he was only son of great King Ban of Brittany, and how, one night, his
    father, with his mother Helen and himself, fled from his burning castle;
    how his father, groaning deeply, fell to the ground and died of grief and
    wounds, and how his mother, running to her husband, left himself alone;
    how, as he thus lay wailing, came the lady of the lake, and took him in
    her arms and went with him into the midst of the waters, where, with his
    cousins Lionel and Bors he had been cherished all his childhood until he
    came to King Arthur's court; and how this was the reason why men called
    him Lancelot du Lake.

    Anon it was ordained by King Arthur, that in every year at Pentecost there
    should be held a festival of all the knights of the Round Table at
    Caerleon, or such other place as he should choose. And at those festivals
    should be told publicly the most famous adventures of any knight during
    the past year.

    So, when Sir Lancelot saw Queen Guinevere rejoiced to hear his wanderings
    and adventures, he resolved to set forth yet again, and win more worship
    still, that he might more increase her favour. Then he bade his cousin Sir
    Lionel make ready, "for," said he, "we two will seek adventure." So they
    mounted their horses - armed at all points - and rode into a vast forest;
    and when they had passed through it, they came to a great plain, and the
    weather being very hot about noontide, Sir Lancelot greatly longed to
    sleep. Then Sir Lionel espied a great apple-tree standing by a hedge, and
    said, "Brother, yonder is a fair shadow where we may rest ourselves and
    horses."

    "I am full glad of it," said Sir Lancelot, "for all these seven years I
    have not been so sleepy."

    So they alighted there, and tied their horses up to sundry trees; and Sir
    Lionel waked and watched while Sir Lancelot fell asleep, and slept passing
    fast.

    In the meanwhile came three knights, riding as fast flying as ever they
    could ride, and after them followed a single knight; but when Sir Lionel
    looked at him, he thought he had never seen so great and strong a man, or
    so well furnished and apparelled. Anon he saw him overtake the last of
    those who fled, and smite him to the ground; then came he to the second,
    and smote him such a stroke that horse and man went to the earth; then
    rode he to the third, likewise, and struck him off his horse more than a
    spear's length. With that he lighted from his horse, and bound all three
    knights fast with the reins of their own bridles.

    When Sir Lionel saw this he thought the time was come to prove himself
    against him, so quietly and cautiously, lest he should wake Sir Lancelot,
    he took his horse and mounted and rode after him. Presently overtaking
    him, he cried aloud to him to turn, which instantly he did, and smote Sir
    Lionel so hard that horse and man went down forthwith. Then took he up Sir
    Lionel, and threw him bound over his own horse's back; and so he served
    the three other knights, and rode them away to his own castle. There they
    were disarmed, stripped naked, and beaten with thorns, and afterwards
    thrust into a deep prison, where many more knights, also, made great moans
    and lamentations, saying, "Alas, alas! there is no man can help us but Sir
    Lancelot, for no other knight can match this tyrant Turquine, our
    conqueror."

    But all this while, Sir Lancelot lay sleeping soundly under the
    apple-tree. And, as it chanced, there passed that way four queens, of high
    estate, riding upon four white mules, under four canopies of green silk
    borne on spears, to keep them from the sun. As they rode thus, they heard
    a great horse grimly neigh, and, turning them about, soon saw a sleeping
    knight that lay all armed under an apple-tree; and when they saw his
    face, they knew it was Lancelot of the Lake.

    Then they began to strive which of them should have the care of him. But
    Queen Morgan le Fay, King Arthur's half sister, the great sorceress, was
    one of them, and said "We need not strive for him, I have enchanted him,
    so that for six hours more he shall not wake. Let us take him to my
    castle, and, when he wakes, himself shall choose which one of us he would
    rather serve." So Sir Lancelot was laid upon his shield and borne on
    horseback between two knights, to the castle, and there laid in a cold
    chamber, till the spell should pass.

    Anon, they sent him a fair damsel, bearing his supper, who asked him,
    "What cheer?"

    "I cannot tell, fair damsel," said he, "for I know not how I came into
    this castle, if it were not by enchantment."

    "Sir," said she, "be of good heart, and to-morrow at the dawn of day, ye
    shall know more."

    And so she left him alone, and there he lay all night. In the morning
    early came the four queens to him, passing richly dressed; and said, "Sir
    knight, thou must understand that thou art our prisoner, and that we know
    thee well for King Ban's son, Sir Lancelot du Lake. And though we know
    full well there is one lady only in this world may have thy love, and she
    Queen Guinevere - King Arthur's wife - yet now are we resolved to have thee
    to serve one of us; choose, therefore, of us four which thou wilt serve. I
    am Queen Morgan le Fay, Queen of the land of Gore, and here also is the
    Queen of Northgales, and the Queen of Eastland, and the Queen of the Out
    Isles. Choose, then, at once, for else shall thou abide here, in this
    prison, till thy death."

    "It is a hard case," said Sir Lancelot, "that either I must die, or choose
    one of you for my mistress! Yet had I rather die in this prison than serve
    any living creature against my will. So take this for my answer. I will
    serve none of ye, for ye be false enchantresses. And as for my lady, Queen
    Guinevere, whom lightly ye have spoken of, were I at liberty I would prove
    it upon you or upon yours she is the truest lady living to her lord the
    king."

    "Well," said the queen, "is this your answer, that ye refuse us all?"

    "Yea, on my life," said Lancelot, "refused ye be of me."

    So they departed from him in great wrath, and left him sorrowfully
    grieving in his dungeon.

    At noon the damsel came to him and brought his dinner, and asked him as
    before, "What cheer?"

    "Truly, fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "in all my life never so ill."

    "Sir," replied she, "I grieve to see ye so, but if ye do as I advise, I
    can help ye out of this distress, and will do so if you promise me a
    boon."

    "Fair damsel," said Sir Lancelot, "right willingly will I grant it thee,
    for sorely do I dread these four witch-queens, who have destroyed and
    slain many a good knight with their enchantments."

    Then said the damsel, "Sir, wilt thou promise me to help my father on next
    Tuesday, for he hath a tournament with the King of Northgales, and last
    Tuesday lost the field through three knights of King Arthur's court, who
    came against him. And if next Tuesday thou wilt aid him, to-morrow,
    before daylight, by God's grace, I will deliver thee."

    "Fair maiden," said Sir Lancelot, "tell me thy father's name and I will
    answer thee."

    "My father is King Bagdemagus," said she.

    "I know him well," replied Sir Lancelot, "for a noble king and a good
    knight; and by the faith of my body I will do him all the service I am
    able on that day."

    "Grammercy to thee, Sir knight," said the damsel.

    "To-morrow, when thou art delivered from this place, ride ten miles hence
    unto an abbey of white monks, and there abide until I bring my father to
    thee."

    "So be it," said Sir Lancelot, "as I am a true knight."

    So she departed, and on the morrow, early, came again, and let him out of
    twelve gates, differently locked, and brought him to his armour; and when
    he was all armed, she brought him his horse also, and lightly he saddled
    him, and took a great spear in his hand, and mounted and rode forth,
    saying, as he went, "Fair damsel, I shall not fail thee, by the grace of
    God."

    And all that day he rode in a great forest, and could find no highway, and
    spent the night in the wood; but the next morning found his road, and came
    to the abbey of white monks. And there he saw King Bagdemagus and his
    daughter waiting for him. So when they were together in a chamber, Sir
    Lancelot told the king how he had been betrayed by an enchantment, and how
    his brother Lionel was gone he knew not where, and how the damsel had
    delivered him from the castle of Queen Morgan le Fay. "Wherefore while I
    live," said he, "I shall do service to herself and all her kindred."

    "Then am I sure of thy aid," said the king, "on Tuesday now next coming?"

    "Yea, sir, I shall not fail thee," said Sir Lancelot; "but what knights
    were they who last week defeated thee, and took part with the King of
    Northgales?"

    "Sir Mador de la Port, Sir Modred, and Sir Gahalatine," replied the king.

    "Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "as I understand, the tournament shall take
    place but three miles from this abbey; send then to me here, three knights
    of thine, the best thou hast, and let them all have plain white shields,
    such as I also will; then will we four come suddenly into the midst
    between both parties, and fall upon thy enemies, and grieve them all we
    can, and none will know us who we are."

    So, on the Tuesday, Sir Lancelot and the three knights lodged themselves
    in a small grove hard by the lists. Then came into the field the King of
    Northgales, with one hundred and sixty helms, and the three knights of
    King Arthur's court, who stood apart by themselves. And when King
    Bagdemagus had arrived, with eighty helms, both companies set all their
    spears in rest and came together with a mighty clash, wherein were slain
    twelve knights of King Bagdemagus, and six of the King of Northgales; and
    the party of King Bagdemagus was driven back.

    With that, came Sir Lancelot, and thrust into the thickest of the press,
    and smote down with one spear five knights, and brake the backs of four,
    and cast down the King of Northgales, and brake his thigh by the fall.
    When the three knights of Arthur's court saw this, they rode at Sir
    Lancelot, and each after other attacked him; but he overthrew them all,
    and smote them nigh to death. Then taking a new spear, he bore down to the
    ground sixteen more knights, and hurt them all so sorely, that they could
    carry arms no more that day. And when his spear at length was broken, he
    took yet another, and smote down twelve knights more, the most of whom he
    wounded mortally, till in the end the party of the King of Northgales
    would joust no more, and the victory was cried to King Bagdemagus.

    [Illustration: Sir Lancelot smote down with one spear five knights, and
    brake the backs of four, and cast down the King of Northgales.]

    Then Sir Lancelot rode forth with King Bagdemagus to his castle, and there
    he feasted with great cheer and welcome, and received many royal gifts.
    And on the morrow he took leave and went to find his brother Lionel.

    Anon, by chance, he came to the same forest where the four queens had
    found him sleeping, and there he met a damsel riding on a white palfrey.
    When they had saluted each other, Sir Lancelot said, "Fair damsel, knowest
    thou where any adventures may be had in this country?"

    "Sir knight," said she, "there are adventures great enough close by if
    thou darest prove them."

    "Why should I not," said he, "since for that cause I came here?"

    "Sir," said the damsel, "hard by this place there dwelleth a knight that
    cannot be defeated by any man, so great and perilously strong he is. His
    name is Sir Turquine, and in the prisons of his castle lie three score
    knights and four, mostly from King Arthur's court, whom he hath taken with
    his own hands. But promise me, ere thou undertakest their deliverance, to
    go and help me afterwards, and free me and many other ladies that are
    distressed by a false knight." "Bring me but to this felon Turquine,"
    quoth Sir Lancelot, "and I will afterwards fulfil all your wishes."

    So the damsel went before, and brought him to a ford, and a tree whereon a
    great brass basin hung; and Sir Lancelot beat with his spear-end upon the
    basin, long and hard, until he beat the bottom of it out, but he saw
    nothing. Then he rode to and fro before the castle gates for well-nigh
    half an hour, and anon saw a great knight riding from the distance,
    driving a horse before him, across which hung an armed man bound. And when
    they came near, Sir Lancelot knew the prisoner for a knight of the Round
    Table. By that time, the great knight who drove the prisoner saw Sir
    Lancelot, and each of them began to settle his spear, and to make ready.

    "Fair sir," then said Sir Lancelot, "put off that wounded knight, I pray
    thee, from his horse, and let him rest while thou and I shall prove our
    strength upon each other; for, as I am told, thou doest, and hast done,
    great shame and injury to knights of the Round Table. Wherefore, I warn
    thee now, defend thyself."

    "If thou mayest be of the Round Table," answered Turquine, "I defy thee,
    and all thy fellows."

    "That is saying overmuch," said Sir Lancelot.

    Then, setting their lances in rest, they spurred their horses towards each
    other, as fast as they could go, and smote so fearfully upon each other's
    shields, that both their horses' backs brake under them. As soon as they
    could clear their saddles, they took their shields before them, and drew
    their swords, and came together eagerly, and fought with great and
    grievous strokes; and soon they both had many grim and fearful wounds, and
    bled in streams. Thus they fought two hours and more, thrusting and
    smiting at each other, wherever they could hit.

    Anon, they both were breathless, and stood leaning on their swords.

    "Now, comrade," said Sir Turquine, "let us wait awhile, and answer me what
    I shall ask thee."

    "Say on," said Lancelot.

    "Thou art," said Turquine, "the best man I ever met, and seemest like one
    that I hate above all other knights that live; but if thou be not he, I
    will make peace with thee, and for sake of thy great valour, will deliver
    all the three score prisoners and four who lie within my dungeons, and
    thou and I will be companions evermore. Tell me, then, thy name."

    "Thou sayest well," replied Sir Lancelot; "but who is he thou hatest so
    above all others?"

    "His name," said Turquine, "is Sir Lancelot of the Lake; and he slew my
    brother Sir Carados, at the dolorous tower; wherefore, if ever I shall
    meet with him, one of us two shall slay the other; and thereto I have
    sworn by a great oath. And to discover and destroy him I have slain a
    hundred knights, and crippled utterly as many more, and many have died in
    my prisons; and now, as I have told thee, I have many more therein, who
    all shall be delivered, if thou tell me thy name, and it be not Sir
    Lancelot."

    "Well," said Lancelot, "I am that knight, son of King Ban of Benwick, and
    Knight of the Round Table; so now I defy thee to do thy best!"

    "Aha!" said Turquine, with a shout, "is it then so at last! Thou art more
    welcome to my sword than ever knight or lady was to feast, for never
    shall we part till one of us be dead."

    Then did they hurtle together like two wild bulls, slashing and lashing
    with their shields and swords, and sometimes falling both on to the
    ground. For two more hours they fought so, and at the last Sir Turquine
    grew very faint, and gave a little back, and bare his shield full low for
    weariness. When Sir Lancelot saw him thus, he leaped upon him fiercely as
    a lion, and took him by the crest of his helmet, and dragged him to his
    knees; and then he tore his helmet off and smote his neck asunder.

    Then he arose, and went to the damsel who had brought him to Sir Turquine,
    and said, "I am ready, fair lady, to go with thee upon thy service, but I
    have no horse."

    "Fair sir," said she, "take ye this horse of the wounded knight whom
    Turquine but just now was carrying to his prisons, and send that knight on
    to deliver all the prisoners."

    So Sir Lancelot went to the knight and prayed him for the loan of his
    horse.

    "Fair lord," said he, "ye are right welcome, for to-day ye have saved both
    me and my horse; and I see that ye are the best knight in all the world,
    for in my sight have ye slain the mightiest man and the best knight,
    except thyself, I ever saw."

    "Sir," said Sir Lancelot, "I thank thee well; and now go into yonder
    castle, where thou shall find many noble knights of the Round Table, for I
    have seen their shields hung on the trees around. On yonder tree alone
    there are Sir Key's, Sir Brandel's, Sir Marhaus', Sir Galind's, and Sir
    Aliduke's, and many more; and also my two kinsmen's shields, Sir Ector de
    Maris' and Sir Lionel's. And I pray you greet them all from me, Sir
    Lancelot of the Lake, and tell them that I bid them help themselves to any
    treasures they can find within the castle; and that I pray my brethren,
    Lionel and Ector, to go to King Arthur's court and stay there till I come.
    And by the high feast at Pentecost I must be there; but now I must ride
    forth with this damsel to fulfil my promise."

    So, as they went, the damsel told him, "Sir, we are now near the place
    where the foul knight haunteth, who robbeth and distresseth all ladies and
    gentlewomen travelling past this way, against whom I have sought thy aid."

    Then they arranged that she should ride on foremost, and Sir Lancelot
    should follow under cover of the trees by the roadside, and if he saw her
    come to any mishap, he should ride forth and deal with him that troubled
    her. And as the damsel rode on at a soft ambling pace, a knight and page
    burst forth from the roadside and forced the damsel from her horse, till
    she cried out for help.

    Then came Sir Lancelot rushing through the wood as fast as he might fly,
    and all the branches of the trees crackled and waved around him. "O thou
    false knight and traitor to all knighthood!" shouted he, "who taught thee
    to distress fair ladies thus?"

    The foul knight answered nothing, but drew out his sword and rode at Sir
    Lancelot, who threw his spear away and drew his own sword likewise, and
    struck him such a mighty blow as clave his head down to the throat. "Now
    hast thou the wages thou long hast earned!" said he; and so departed from
    the damsel.

    Then for two days he rode in a great forest, and had but scanty food and
    lodging, and on the third day he rode over a long bridge, when suddenly
    there started up a passing foul churl, and smote his horse across the
    nose, so that he started and turned back, rearing with pain. "Why ridest
    thou over here without my leave?" said he.

    "Why should I not?" said Sir Lancelot; "there is no other way to ride."

    "Thou shalt not pass by here," cried out the churl, and dashed at him with
    a great club full of iron spikes, till Sir Lancelot was fain to draw his
    sword and smite him dead upon the earth.

    At the end of the bridge was a fair village, and all the people came and
    cried, "Ah, sir! a worse deed for thyself thou never didst, for thou hast
    slain the chief porter of the castle yonder!" But he let them talk as they
    pleased, and rode straight forward to the castle.

    There he alighted, and tied his horse to a ring in the wall; and going in,
    he saw a wide green court, and thought it seemed a noble place to fight
    in. And as he looked about, he saw many people watching him from doors and
    windows, making signs of warning, and saying, "Fair knight, thou art
    unhappy." In the next moment came upon him two great giants, well armed
    save their heads, and with two horrible clubs in their hands. Then he put
    his shield before him, and with it warded off one giant's stroke, and
    clove the other with his sword from the head downward to the chest. When
    the first giant saw that, he ran away mad with fear; but Sir Lancelot ran
    after him, and smote him through the shoulder, and shore him down his
    back, so that he fell dead.

    Then he walked onward to the castle hall, and saw a band of sixty ladies
    and young damsels coming forth, who knelt to him, and thanked him for
    their freedom. "For, sir," said they, "the most of us have been prisoners
    here these seven years; and have been kept at all manner of work to earn
    our meat, though we be all great gentlewomen born. Blessed be the time
    that thou wast born, for never did a knight a deed of greater worship than
    thou hast this day, and thereto will we all bear witness in all times and
    places! Tell us, therefore, noble knight, thy name and court, that we may
    tell them to our friends!" And when they heard it, they all cried aloud,
    "Well may it be so, for we knew that no knight save thou shouldst ever
    overcome those giants; and many a long day have we sighed for thee; for
    the giants feared no other name among all knights but thine."

    Then he told them to take the treasures of the castle as a reward for
    their grievances, and to return to their homes, and so rode away into many
    strange and wild countries. And at last, after many days, by chance he
    came, near the night time, to a fair mansion, wherein he found an old
    gentlewoman, who gave him and his horse good cheer. And when bed time was
    come, his host brought him to a chamber over a gate, and there he unarmed,
    and went to bed and fell asleep.

    But soon thereafter came one riding in great haste, and knocking
    vehemently at the gate below, which when Sir Lancelot heard, he rose and
    looked out of the window, and, by the moonlight, saw three knights come
    riding fiercely after one man, and lashing on him all at once with their
    swords, while the one knight nobly fought all.

    Then Sir Lancelot quickly armed himself, and getting through the window,
    let himself down by a sheet into the midst of them, crying out, "Turn ye
    on me, ye cowards, and leave fighting with that knight!" Then they all
    left Sir Key, for the first knight was he, and began to fall upon Sir
    Lancelot furiously. And when Sir Key would have come forward to assist
    him, Sir Lancelot refused, and cried, "Leave me alone to deal with them."
    And presently, with six great strokes, he felled them all.

    Then they cried out, "Sir knight, we yield us unto thee, as to a man of
    might!"

    "I will not take your yielding!" said he; "yield ye to Sir Key, the
    seneschal, or I will have your lives."

    "Fair knight," said they, "excuse us in that thing, for we have chased Sir
    Key thus far, and should have overcome him but for thee."

    "Well," said Sir Lancelot, "do as ye will, for ye may live or die; but, if
    ye live, ye shall be holden to Sir Key."

    Then they yielded to him; and Sir Lancelot commanded them to go unto King
    Arthur's court at the next Pentecost, and say, Sir Key had sent them
    prisoners to Queen Guinevere. And this they sware to do upon their swords.

    Then Sir Lancelot knocked at the gate with his sword-hilt till his hostess
    came and let him in again, and Sir Key also. And when the light came, Sir
    Key knew Sir Lancelot, and knelt and thanked him for his courtesy, and
    gentleness, and kindness. "Sir," said he, "I have done no more than what I
    ought to do, and ye are welcome; therefore let us now take rest."

    So when Sir Key had supped, they went to sleep, and Sir Lancelot and he
    slept in the same bed. On the morrow, Sir Lancelot rose early, and took
    Sir Key's shield and armour and set forth. When Sir Key arose, he found
    Sir Lancelot's armour by his bedside, and his own arms gone. "Now, by my
    faith," thought he, "I know that he will grieve some knights of our king's
    court; for those who meet him will be bold to joust with him, mistaking
    him for me, while I, dressed in his shield and armour, shall surely ride
    in peace."

    Then Sir Lancelot, dressed in Sir Key's apparel, rode long in a great
    forest, and came at last to a low country, full of rivers and fair
    meadows, and saw a bridge before him, whereon were three silk tents of
    divers colours, and to each tent was hung a white shield, and by each
    shield stood a knight. So Sir Lancelot went by without speaking a word.
    And when he had passed, the three knights said it was the proud Sir Key,
    "who thinketh no knight equal to himself, although the contrary is full
    often proved upon him."

    "By my faith!" said one of them, named Gaunter, "I will ride after and
    attack him for all his pride, and ye shall watch my speed."

    Then, taking shield and spear, he mounted and rode after Sir Lancelot, and
    cried, "Abide, proud knight, and turn, for thou shalt not pass free!"

    So Sir Lancelot turned, and each one put his spear in rest and came with
    all his might against the other. And Sir Gaunter's spear brake short, but
    Sir Lancelot smote him down, both horse and man.

    When the other knights saw this, they said, "Yonder is not Sir Key, but a
    bigger man."

    "I dare wager my head," said Sir Gilmere, "yonder knight hath slain Sir
    Key, and taken his horse and harness."

    "Be it so, or not," said Sir Reynold, the third brother; "let us now go to
    our brother Gaunter's rescue; we shall have enough to do to match that
    knight, for, by his stature, I believe it is Sir Lancelot or Sir
    Tristram."

    Anon, they took their horses and galloped after Sir Lancelot; and Sir
    Gilmere first assailed him, but was smitten down forthwith, and lay
    stunned on the earth. Then said Sir Reynold, "Sir knight, thou art a
    strong man, and, I believe, hast slain my two brothers, wherefore my heart
    is sore against thee; yet, if I might with honour, I would avoid thee.
    Nevertheless, that cannot be, so keep thyself." And so they hurtled
    together with all their might, and each man shivered his spear to pieces;
    and then they drew their swords and lashed out eagerly.

    And as they fought, Sir Gaunter and Sir Gilmere presently arose and
    mounted once again, and came down at full tilt upon Sir Lancelot. But,
    when he saw them coming, he put forth all his strength, and struck Sir
    Reynold off his horse. Then, with two other strokes, he served the others
    likewise.

    Anon, Sir Reynold crept along the ground, with his head all bloody, and
    came towards Sir Lancelot. "It is enough," said Lancelot, "I was not far
    from thee when thou wast made a knight, Sir Reynold, and know thee for a
    good and valiant man, and was full loth to slay thee."

    "Grammercy for thy gentleness!" said Sir Reynold. "I and my brethren will
    straightway yield to thee when we know thy name, for well we know that
    thou art not Sir Key."

    "As for that," said Sir Lancelot, "be it as it may, but ye shall yield to
    Queen Guinevere at the next feast of Pentecost as prisoners, and say that
    Sir Key sent ye."

    Then they swore to him it should be done as he commanded. And so Sir
    Lancelot passed on, and the three brethren helped each other's wounds as
    best they might.

    Then rode Sir Lancelot forward into a deep forest, and came upon four
    knights of King Arthur's court, under an oak tree - Sir Sagramour, Sir
    Ector, Sir Gawain, and Sir Ewaine. And when they spied him, they thought
    he was Sir Key. "Now by my faith," said Sir Sagramour, "I will prove Sir
    Key's might!" and taking his spear he rode towards Sir Lancelot.

    But Sir Lancelot was aware of him, and, setting his spear in rest, smote
    him so sorely, that horse and man fell to the earth.

    "Lo!" cried Sir Ector, "I see by the buffet that knight hath given our
    fellow he is stronger than Sir Key. Now will I try what I can do against
    him!" So Sir Ector took his spear, and galloped at Sir Lancelot; and Sir
    Lancelot met him as he came, and smote him through shield and shoulder, so
    that he fell, but his own spear was not broken.

    "By my faith," cried Sir Ewaine, "yonder is a strong knight, and must have
    slain Sir Key, and taken his armour! By his strength, I see it will be
    hard to match him." So saying he rode towards Sir Lancelot, who met him
    halfway and struck him so fiercely, that at one blow he overthrew him
    also.

    "Now," said Sir Gawain, "will I encounter him." So he took a good spear in
    his hand, and guarded himself with his shield. And he and Sir Lancelot
    rode against each other, with their horses at full speed, and furiously
    smote each other on the middle of their shields; but Sir Gawain's spear
    broke short asunder, and Sir Lancelot charged so mightily upon him, that
    his horse and he both fell, and rolled upon the ground.

    "Ah," said Sir Lancelot, smiling, as he rode away from the four knights,
    "heaven give joy to him who made this spear, for never held I better in my
    hand."

    But the four knights said to each other, "Truly one spear hath felled us
    all."

    "I dare lay my life," said Sir Gawain, "it is Sir Lancelot. I know him by
    his riding."

    So they all departed for the court.

    And as Sir Lancelot rode still in the forest, he saw a black bloodhound,
    running with its head towards the ground, as if it tracked a deer. And
    following after it, he came to a great pool of blood. But the hound, ever
    and anon looking behind, ran through a great marsh, and over a bridge,
    towards an old manor house. So Sir Lancelot followed, and went into the
    hall, and saw a dead knight lying there, whose wounds the hound licked.
    And a lady stood behind him, weeping and wringing her hands, who cried, "O
    knight! too great is the sorrow which thou hast brought me!"

    "Why say ye so?" replied Sir Lancelot; "for I never harmed this knight,
    and am full sorely grieved to see thy sorrow."

    "Nay, sir," said the lady, "I see it is not thou hast slain my husband,
    for he that truly did that deed is deeply wounded, and shall never more
    recover."

    "What is thy husband's name?" said Sir Lancelot.

    "His name," she answered, "was Sir Gilbert - one of the best knights in all
    the world; but I know not his name who hath slain him."

    "God send thee comfort," said Sir Lancelot, and departed again into the
    forest.

    And as he rode, he met with a damsel who knew him, who cried out, "Well
    found, my lord! I pray ye of your knighthood help my brother, who is sore
    wounded and ceases not to bleed, for he fought this day with Sir Gilbert,
    and slew him, but was himself well nigh slain. And there is a sorceress,
    who dwelleth in a castle hard by, and she this day hath told me that my
    brother's wound shall never be made whole until I find a knight to go into
    the Chapel Perilous, and bring from thence a sword and the bloody cloth in
    which the wounded knight was wrapped."

    "This is a marvellous thing!" said Sir Lancelot; "but what is your
    brother's name?"

    "His name, sir," she replied, "is Sir Meliot de Logres."

    "He is a Fellow of the Round Table," said Sir Lancelot, "and truly will I
    do my best to help him."

    "Then, sir," said she, "follow this way, and it will bring ye to the
    Chapel Perilous. I will abide here till God send ye hither again; for if
    ye speed not, there is no living knight who may achieve that adventure."

    So Sir Lancelot departed, and when he came to the Chapel Perilous he
    alighted, and tied his horse to the gate. And as soon as he was within
    the churchyard, he saw on the front of the chapel many shields of knights
    whom he had known, turned upside down. Then saw he in the pathway thirty
    mighty knights, taller than any men whom he had ever seen, all armed in
    black armour, with their swords drawn; and they gnashed their teeth upon
    him as he came. But he put his shield before him, and took his sword in
    hand, ready to do battle with them. And when he would have cut his way
    through them, they scattered on every side and let him pass. Then he went
    into the chapel, and saw therein no light but of a dim lamp burning. Then
    he was aware of a corpse in the midst of the chapel, covered with a silken
    cloth, and so stooped down and cut off a piece of the cloth, whereat the
    earth beneath him trembled. Then saw he a sword lying by the dead knight,
    and taking it in his hand, he hied him from the chapel. As soon as he was
    in the churchyard again, all the thirty knights cried out to him with
    fierce voices, "Sir Lancelot! lay that sword from thee, or thou diest!"

    "Whether I live or die," said he, "ye shall fight for it ere ye take it
    from me."

    With that they let him pass.

    And further on, beyond the chapel, he met a fair damsel, who said, "Sir
    Lancelot, leave that sword behind thee, or thou diest."

    [Illustration: Beyond the chapel, he met a fair damsel, who said, "Sir
    Lancelot, leave that sword behind thee, or thou diest."]

    "I will not leave it," said Sir Lancelot, "for any asking."

    "Then, gentle knight," said the damsel, "I pray thee kiss me once."

    "Nay," said Sir Lancelot, "that God forbid!"

    "Alas!" cried she, "I have lost all my labour! but hadst thou kissed me,
    thy life's days had been all done!"

    "Heaven save me from thy subtle crafts!" said Sir Lancelot; and therewith
    took his horse and galloped forth.

    And when he was departed, the damsel sorrowed greatly, and died in fifteen
    days. Her name was Ellawes, the sorceress.

    Then came Sir Lancelot to Sir Meliot's sister, who, when she saw him,
    clapped her hands and wept for joy, and took him to the castle hard by,
    where Sir Meliot was. And when Sir Lancelot saw Sir Meliot, he knew him,
    though he was pale as ashes for loss of blood. And Sir Meliot, when he saw
    Sir Lancelot, kneeled to him and cried aloud, "O lord, Sir Lancelot! help
    me!"

    And thereupon, Sir Lancelot went to him and touched his wounds with the
    sword, and wiped them with the piece of bloody cloth. And immediately he
    was as whole as though he had been never wounded. Then was there great joy
    between him and Sir Meliot; and his sister made Sir Lancelot good cheer.
    So on the morrow, he took his leave, that he might go to King Arthur's
    court, "for," said he, "it draweth nigh the feast of Pentecost, and there,
    by God's grace, shall ye then find me."

    And riding through many strange countries, over marshes and valleys, he
    came at length before a castle. As he passed by he heard two little bells
    ringing, and looking up, he saw a falcon flying overhead, with bells tied
    to her feet, and long strings dangling from them. And as the falcon flew
    past an elm-tree, the strings caught in the boughs, so that she could fly
    no further.

    In the meanwhile, came a lady from the castle and cried, "Oh, Sir
    Lancelot! as thou art the flower of all knights in the world, help me to
    get my hawk, for she hath slipped away from me, and if she be lost, my
    lord my husband is so hasty, he will surely slay me!"

    "What is thy lord's name?" said Sir Lancelot.

    "His name," said she, "is Sir Phelot, a knight of the King of Northgales."

    "Fair lady," said Sir Lancelot, "since you know my name, and require me,
    on my knighthood, to help you, I will do what I can to get your hawk."

    And thereupon alighting, he tied his horse to the same tree, and prayed
    the lady to unarm him. So when he was unarmed, he climbed up and reached
    the falcon, and threw it to the lady.

    Then suddenly came down, out of the wood, her husband, Sir Phelot, all
    armed, with a drawn sword in his hand, and said, "Oh, Sir Lancelot! now
    have I found thee as I would have thee!" and stood at the trunk of the
    tree to slay him.

    "Ah, lady!" cried Sir Lancelot, "why have ye betrayed me?"

    "She hath done as I commanded her," said Sir Phelot, "and thine hour is
    come that thou must die."

    "It were shame," said Lancelot, "for an armed to slay an unarmed man."

    "Thou hast no other favour from me," said Sir Phelot.

    "Alas!" cried Sir Lancelot, "that ever any knight should die weaponless!"
    And looking overhead, he saw a great bough without leaves, and wrenched it
    off the tree, and suddenly leaped down. Then Sir Phelot struck at him
    eagerly, thinking to have slain him, but Sir Lancelot put aside the stroke
    with the bough, and therewith smote him on the side of the head, till he
    fell swooning to the ground. And tearing his sword from out his hands, he
    shore his neck through from the body. Then did the lady shriek dismally,
    and swooned as though she would die. But Sir Lancelot put on his armour,
    and with haste took his horse and departed thence, thanking God he had
    escaped that peril.

    And as he rode through a valley, among many wild ways, he saw a knight,
    with a drawn sword, chasing a lady to slay her. And seeing Sir Lancelot,
    she cried and prayed to him to come and rescue her.

    At that he went up, saying, "Fie on thee, knight! why wilt thou slay this
    lady? Thou doest shame to thyself and all knights."

    "What hast thou to do between me and my wife?" replied the knight. "I will
    slay her in spite of thee."

    "Thou shall not harm her," said Sir Lancelot, "till we have first fought
    together."

    "Sir," answered the knight, "thou doest ill, for this lady hath betrayed
    me."

    "He speaketh falsely," said the lady, "for he is jealous of me without
    cause, as I shall answer before Heaven; but as thou art named the most
    worshipful knight in the world, I pray thee of thy true knighthood to save
    me, for he is without mercy."

    "Be of good cheer," said Sir Lancelot; "it shall not lie within his power
    to harm thee."

    "Sir," said the knight, "I will be ruled as ye will have me."

    So Sir Lancelot rode between the knight and the lady. And when they had
    ridden awhile, the knight cried out suddenly to Sir Lancelot to turn and
    see what men they were who came riding after them; and while Sir Lancelot,
    thinking not of treason, turned to look, the knight, with one great
    stroke, smote off the lady's head.

    Then was Sir Lancelot passing wroth, and cried, "Thou traitor! Thou hast
    shamed me for ever!" and, alighting from his horse, he drew his sword to
    have slain him instantly; but the knight fell on the ground and clasped
    Sir Lancelot's knees, and cried out for mercy. "Thou shameful knight,"
    answered Lancelot, "thou mayest have no mercy, for thou showedst none,
    therefore arise and fight with me."

    "Nay," said the knight, "I will not rise till thou dost grant me mercy."

    "Now will I deal fairly by thee," said Sir Lancelot; "I will unarm me to
    my shirt, and have my sword only in my hand, and if thou canst slay me
    thou shall be quit for ever."

    "That will I never do," said the knight.

    "Then," answered Sir Lancelot, "take this lady and the head, and bear it
    with thee, and swear to me upon thy sword never to rest until thou comest
    to Queen Guinevere."

    "That will I do," said he.

    "Now," said Sir Lancelot, "tell me thy name."

    "It is Pedivere," answered the knight.

    "In a shameful hour wert thou born," said Sir Lancelot.

    So Sir Pedivere departed, bearing with him the dead lady and her head. And
    when he came to Winchester, where the Queen was with King Arthur, he told
    them all the truth; and afterwards did great and heavy penance many
    years, and became an holy hermit.

    "So, two days before the Feast of Pentecost, Sir Lancelot returned to the
    court, and King Arthur was full glad of his coming. And when Sir Gawain,
    Sir Ewaine, Sir Sagramour, and Sir Ector, saw him in Sir Key's armour,
    they knew well it was he who had smitten them all down with one spear.
    Anon, came all the knights Sir Turquine had taken prisoners, and gave
    worship and honour to Sir Lancelot. Then Sir Key told the King how Sir
    Lancelot had rescued him when he was in near danger of his death; "and,"
    said Sir Key, "he made the knights yield, not to himself, but me. And by
    Heaven! because Sir Lancelot took my armour and left me his, I rode in
    peace, and no man would have aught to do with me." Then came the knights
    who fought with Sir Lancelot at the long bridge and yielded themselves
    also to Sir Key, but he said nay, he had not fought with them. "It is Sir
    Lancelot," said he, "that overcame ye." Next came Sir Meliot de Logres,
    and told King Arthur how Sir Lancelot had saved him from death.

    And so all Sir Lancelot's deeds and great adventures were made known; how
    the four sorceress-queens had him in prison; how he was delivered by the
    daughter of King Bagdemagus, and what deeds of arms he did at the
    tournament between the King of North Wales and King Bagdemagus. And so, at
    that festival, Sir Lancelot had the greatest name of any knight in all the
    world, and by high and low was he the most honoured of all men.




    CHAPTER X

    _Adventures of Sir Beaumains or Sir Gareth_


    Again King Arthur held the Feast of Pentecost, with all the Table Round,
    and after his custom sat in the banquet hall, before beginning meat,
    waiting for some adventure. Then came there to the king a squire and said,
    "Lord, now may ye go to meat, for here a damsel cometh with some strange
    adventure." So the king was glad, and sat down to meat.

    Anon the damsel came in and saluted him, praying him for succour. "What
    wilt thou?" said the king. "Lord," answered she, "my mistress is a lady of
    great renown, but is at this time besieged by a tyrant, who will not
    suffer her to go out of her castle; and because here in thy court the
    knights are called the noblest in the world, I come to pray thee for thy
    succour. "Where dwelleth your lady?" answered the king. "What is her name,
    and who is he that hath besieged her?" "For her name," replied the damsel,
    "as yet I may not tell it; but she is a lady of worship and great lands.
    The tyrant that besiegeth her and wasteth her lands is called the Red
    Knight of the Redlands." "I know him not," said Arthur. "But I know him,
    lord," said Sir Gawain, "and he is one of the most perilous knights in all
    the world. Men say he hath the strength of seven; and from him I myself
    once hardly escaped with life." "Fair damsel," said the king, "there be
    here many knights that would gladly do their uttermost to rescue your
    lady, but unless ye tell me her name, and where she dwelleth, none of my
    knights shall go with you by my leave."

    Now, there was a stripling at the court called Beaumains, who served in
    the king's kitchen, a fair youth and of great stature. Twelve months
    before this time he had come to the king as he sat at meat, at
    Whitsuntide, and prayed three gifts of him. And being asked what gifts, he
    answered, "As for the first gift I will ask it now, but the other two
    gifts I will ask on this day twelve months, wheresoever ye hold your high
    feast." Then said King Arthur, "What is thy first request?" "This, lord,"
    said he, "that thou wilt give me meat and drink enough for twelve months
    from this time, and then will I ask my other two gifts." And the king
    seeing that he was a goodly youth, and deeming that he was come of
    honourable blood, had granted his desire, and given him into the charge of
    Sir Key, the steward. But Sir Key scorned and mocked the youth, calling
    him Beaumains, because his hands were large and fair, and putting him into
    the kitchen, where he had served for twelve months as a scullion, and, in
    spite of all his churlish treatment, had faithfully obeyed Sir Key. But
    Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawain were angered when they saw Sir Key so churlish
    to a youth that had so worshipful a bearing, and ofttimes had they given
    him gold and clothing.

    And now at this time came young Beaumains to the king, while the damsel
    was there, and said, "Lord, now I thank thee well and heartily that I have
    been twelve months kept in thy kitchen, and have had full sustenance. Now
    will I ask my two remaining gifts." "Ask," said King Arthur, "on my good
    faith." "These, lord," said he, "shall be my two gifts - the one, that thou
    wilt grant me this adventure of the damsel, for to me of right it
    belongeth; and the other, that thou wilt bid Sir Lancelot make me a
    knight, for of him only will I have that honour; and I pray that he may
    ride after me and make me a knight when I require him." "Be it as thou
    wilt," replied the king. But thereupon the damsel was full wroth, and
    said, "Shall I have a kitchen page for this adventure?" and so she took
    horse and departed.

    Then came one to Beaumains, and told him that a dwarf with a horse and
    armour were waiting for him. And all men marvelled whence these things
    came. But when he was on horseback and armed, scarce any one at the court
    was a goodlier man than he. And coming into the hall, he took his leave of
    the king and Sir Gawain, and prayed Sir Lancelot to follow him. So he rode
    after the damsel, and many of the court went out to see him, so richly
    arrayed and horsed; yet he had neither shield nor spear. Then Sir Key
    cried, "I also will ride after the kitchen boy, and see whether he will
    obey me now." And taking his horse, he rode after him, and said, "Know ye
    not me, Beaumains?" "Yea," said he, "I know thee for an ungentle knight,
    therefore beware of me." Then Sir Key put his spear in rest and ran at
    him, but Beaumains rushed upon him with his sword in his hand, and
    therewith, putting aside the spear, struck Sir Key so sorely in the side,
    that he fell down, as if dead. Then he alighted, and took his shield and
    spear, and bade his dwarf ride upon Sir Key's horse.

    By this time, Sir Lancelot had come up, and Beaumains offering to tilt
    with him, they both made ready. And their horses came together so fiercely
    that both fell to the earth, full sorely bruised. Then they arose, and
    Beaumains, putting up his shield before him, offered to fight Sir
    Lancelot, on foot. So they rushed upon each other, striking, and
    thrusting, and parrying, for the space of an hour. And Lancelot marvelled
    at the strength of Beaumains, for he fought more like a giant than a man,
    and his fighting was passing fierce and terrible. So, at the last, he
    said, "Fight not so sorely, Beaumains; our quarrel is not such that we may
    not now cease." "True," answered Beaumains; "yet it doth me good to feel
    thy might, though I have not yet proved my uttermost." "By my faith," said
    Lancelot, "I had as much as I could do to save myself from you unshamed,
    therefore be in no doubt of any earthly knight." "May I, then, stand as a
    proved knight?" said Beaumains. "For that will I be thy warrant," answered
    Lancelot. "Then, I pray thee," said he, "give me the order of knighthood."
    "First, then, must thou tell me of thy name and kindred," said Sir
    Lancelot. "If thou wilt tell them to no other, I will tell thee," answered
    he. "My name is Gareth of Orkney, and I am own brother to Sir Gawain."
    "Ah!" said Sir Lancelot, "at that am I full glad; for, truly, I deemed
    thee to be of gentle blood." So then he knighted Beaumains, and, after
    that, they parted company, and Sir Lancelot, returning to the court, took
    up Sir Key on his shield. And hardly did Sir Key escape with his life,
    from the wound Beaumains had given him; but all men blamed him for his
    ungentle treatment of so brave a knight.

    Then Sir Beaumains rode forward, and soon overtook the damsel; but she
    said to him, in scorn, "Return again, base kitchen page! What art thou,
    but a washer-up of dishes!" "Damsel," said he, "say to me what thou wilt,
    I will not leave thee; for I have undertaken to King Arthur to relieve thy
    adventure, and I will finish it to the end, or die." "Thou finish my
    adventure!" said she - "anon, thou shalt meet one, whose face thou wilt not
    even dare to look at." "I shall attempt it," answered he. So, as they rode
    thus, into a wood, there met them a man, fleeing, as for his life.
    "Whither fleest thou?" said Sir Beaumains. "O lord!" he answered, "help
    me; for, in a valley hard by, there are six thieves, who have taken my
    lord, and bound him, and I fear will slay him." "Bring me thither," said
    Sir Beaumains. So they rode to the place, and Sir Beaumains rushed after
    the thieves, and smote one, at the first stroke, so that he died; and
    then, with two other blows, slew a second and third. Then fled the other
    three, and Sir Beaumains rode after them, and overtook and slew them all.
    Then he returned and unbound the knight. And the knight thanked him, and
    prayed him to ride to his castle, where he would reward him. "Sir,"
    answered Sir Beaumains, "I will have no reward of thee, for but this day
    was I made knight by the most noble Sir Lancelot; and besides, I must go
    with this damsel." Then the knight begged the damsel to rest that night at
    his castle. So they all rode thither, and ever the damsel scoffed at Sir
    Beaumains as a kitchen boy, and laughed at him before the knight their
    host, so that he set his meat before him at a lower table, as though he
    were not of their company.

    And on the morrow, the damsel and Sir Beaumains took their leave of the
    knight, and thanking him departed. Then they rode on their way till they
    came to a great forest, through which flowed a river, and there was but
    one passage over it, whereat stood two knights armed to hinder the way.
    "Wilt thou match those two knights," said the damsel to Sir Beaumains, "or
    return again?" "I would not return," said he, "though they were six."
    Therewith he galloped into the water, and swam his horse into the middle
    of the stream. And there, in the river, one of the knights met him, and
    they brake their spears together, and then drew their swords, and smote
    fiercely at each other. And at the last, Sir Beaumains struck the other
    mightily upon the helm, so that he fell down stunned into the water, and
    was drowned. Then Sir Beaumains spurred his horse on to the land, where
    instantly the other knight fell on him. And they also brake their spears
    upon each other, and then drew their swords, and fought savagely and long
    together. And after many blows, Sir Beaumains clove through the knight's
    skull down to the shoulders. Then rode Sir Beaumains to the damsel, but
    ever she still scoffed at him, and said, "Alas! that a kitchen page should
    chance to slay two such brave knights! Thou deemest now that thou hast
    done a mighty deed, but it is not so; for the first knight's horse
    stumbled, and thus was he drowned - not by thy strength; and as for the
    second knight, thou wentest by chance behind him, and didst kill him
    shamefully." "Damsel," said Sir Beaumains, "say what ye list, I care not
    so I may win your lady; and wouldst thou give me but fair language, all
    my care were past; for whatsoever knights I meet, I fear them not." "Thou
    shalt see knights that shall abate thy boast, base kitchen knave," replied
    she; "yet say I this for thine advantage, for if thou followest me thou
    wilt be surely slain, since I see all thou doest is but by chance, and not
    by thy own prowess." "Well damsel," said he, "say what ye will, wherever
    ye go I will follow."

    So they rode on until the eventide, and still the damsel evermore kept
    chiding Sir Beaumains. Then came they to a black space of land, whereon
    was a black hawthorn tree, and on the tree there hung a black banner, and
    on the other side was a black shield and spear, and by them a great black
    horse, covered with silk; and hard by sat a knight armed in black armour,
    whose name was the Knight of the Blacklands. When the damsel saw him, she
    cried out to Beaumains, "Flee down the valley, for thy horse is not
    saddled!" "Wilt thou for ever deem me coward?" answered he. With that came
    the Black Knight to the damsel, and said, "Fair damsel, hast thou brought
    this knight from Arthur's court to be thy champion?" "Not so, fair
    knight," said she; "he is but a kitchen knave." "Then wherefore cometh he
    in such array?" said he; "it is a shame that he should bear thee company."
    "I cannot be delivered from him," answered she: "for in spite of me he
    rideth with me; and would to Heaven you would put him from me, or now slay
    him, for he hath slain two knights at the river passage yonder, and done
    many marvellous deeds through pure mischance." "I marvel," said the Black
    Knight, "that any man of worship will fight with him." "They know him
    not," said the damsel, "and think, because he rideth with me, that he is
    well born." "Truly, he hath a goodly person, and is likely to be a strong
    man," replied the knight; "but since he is no man of worship, he shall
    leave his horse and armour with me, for it were a shame for me to do him
    more harm."

    When Sir Beaumains heard him speak thus, he said, "Horse or armour gettest
    thou none of me, Sir knight, save thou winnest them with thy hands;
    therefore defend thyself, and let me see what thou canst do." "How sayest
    thou?" answered the Black Knight. "Now quit this lady also, for it
    beseemeth not a kitchen knave like thee to ride with such a lady." "I am
    of higher lineage than thou," said Sir Beaumains, "and will straightway
    prove it on thy body." Then furiously they drove their horses at each
    other, and came together as it had been thunder. But the Black Knight's
    spear brake short, and Sir Beaumains thrust him through the side, and his
    spear breaking at the head, left its point sticking fast in the Black
    Knight's body. Yet did the Black Knight draw his sword, and smite at Sir
    Beaumains with many fierce and bitter blows; but after they had fought an
    hour and more, he fell down from his horse in a swoon, and forthwith died.
    Then Sir Beaumains lighted down and armed himself in the Black Knight's
    armour, and rode on after the damsel. But notwithstanding all his valour,
    still she scoffed at him, and said, "Away! for thou savourest ever of the
    kitchen. Alas! that such a knave should by mishap destroy so good a
    knight; yet once again I counsel thee to flee, for hard by is a knight who
    shall repay thee!" "It may chance that I am beaten or slain," answered Sir
    Beaumains, "but I warn thee, fair damsel, that I will not flee away, nor
    leave thy company or my quest, for all that ye can say."

    Anon, as they rode, they saw a knight come swiftly towards them, dressed
    all in green, who, calling to the damsel said, "Is that my brother, the
    Black Knight, that ye have brought with you?" "Nay, and alas!" said she,
    "this kitchen knave hath slain thy brother through mischance." "Alas!"
    said the Green Knight, "that such a noble knight as he was should be slain
    by a knave's hand. Traitor!" cried he to Sir Beaumains, "thou shalt die
    for this! Sir Pereard was my brother, and a full noble knight." "I defy
    thee," said Sir Beaumains, "for I slew him knightly and not shamefully."
    Then the Green Knight rode to a thorn whereon hung a green horn, and, when
    he blew three notes, there came three damsels forth, who quickly armed
    him, and brought him a great horse and a green shield and spear. Then did
    they run at one another with their fullest might, and break their spears
    asunder; and, drawing their swords, they closed in fight, and sorely smote
    and wounded each other with many grievous blows.

    At last, Sir Beaumains' horse jostled against the Green Knight's horse,
    and overthrew him. Then both alighted, and, hurtling together like mad
    lions, fought a great while on foot. But the damsel cheered the Green
    Knight, and said, "My lord, why wilt thou let a kitchen knave so long
    stand up against thee?" Hearing these words, he was ashamed, and gave Sir
    Beaumains such a mighty stroke as clave his shield asunder. When Sir
    Beaumains heard the damsel's words, and felt that blow, he waxed passing
    wroth, and gave the Green Knight such a buffet on the helm that he fell on
    his knees, and with another blow Sir Beaumains threw him on the ground.
    Then the Green Knight yielded, and prayed him to spare his life. "All thy
    prayers are vain," said he, "unless this damsel who came with me pray for
    thee." "That will I never do, base kitchen knave," said she. "Then shall
    he die," said Beaumains. "Alas! fair lady," said the Green Knight, "suffer
    me not to die for a word! O, Sir knight," cried he to Beaumains, "give me
    my life, and I will ever do thee homage; and thirty knights, who owe me
    service, shall give allegiance to thee." "All availeth not," answered Sir
    Beaumains, "unless the damsel ask me for thy life;" and thereupon he made
    as though he would have slain him. Then cried the damsel, "Slay him not;
    for if thou do thou shalt repent it." "Damsel," said Sir Beaumains, "at
    thy command, he shall obtain his life. Arise, Sir knight of the green
    armour, I release thee!" Then the Green Knight knelt at his feet, and did
    him homage with his words. "Lodge with me this night," said he, "and
    to-morrow will I guide ye through the forest." So, taking their horses,
    they rode to his castle, which was hard by.

    Yet still did the damsel rebuke and scoff at Sir Beaumains, and would not
    suffer him to sit at her table. "I marvel," said the Green Knight to her,
    "that ye thus chide so noble a knight, for truly I know none to match him;
    and be sure, that whatsoever he appeareth now, he will prove, at the end,
    of noble blood and royal lineage." But of all this would the damsel take
    no heed, and ceased not to mock at Sir Beaumains. On the morrow, they
    arose and heard mass; and when they had broken their fast, took their
    horses and rode on their way, the Green Knight conveying them through the
    forest. Then, when he had led them for a while, he said to Sir Beaumains,
    "My lord, my thirty knights and I shall always be at thy command
    whensoever thou shalt send for us." "It is well said," replied he; "and
    when I call upon you, you shall yield yourself and all your knights unto
    King Arthur." "That will we gladly do," said the Green Knight, and so
    departed.

    And the damsel rode on before Sir Beaumains, and said to him, "Why dost
    thou follow me, thou kitchen boy? I counsel thee to throw aside thy spear
    and shield, and flee betimes, for wert thou as mighty as Sir Lancelot or
    Sir Tristram, thou shouldest not pass a valley near this place, called the
    Pass Perilous." "Damsel," answered he, "let him that feareth flee; as for
    me, it were indeed a shameful thing to turn after so long a journey." As
    he spake, they came upon a tower as white as snow, with mighty
    battlements, and double moats round it, and over the tower-gate hung fifty
    shields of divers colours. Before the tower walls, they saw a fair meadow,
    wherein were many knights and squires in pavilions, for on the morrow
    there was a tournament at that castle.

    Then the lord of the castle, seeing a knight armed at all points, with a
    damsel and a page, riding towards the tower, came forth to meet them; and
    his horse and harness, with his shield and spear, were all of a red
    colour. When he came near Sir Beaumains, and saw his armour all of black,
    he thought him his own brother, the Black Knight, and so cried aloud,
    "Brother! what do ye here, within these borders?" "Nay!" said the damsel,
    "it is not thy brother, but a kitchen knave of Arthur's court, who hath
    slain thy brother, and overcome thy other brother also, the Green Knight."
    "Now do I defy thee!" cried the Red Knight to Sir Beaumains, and put his
    spear in rest and spurred his horse. Then both knights turned back a
    little space, and ran together with all their might, till their horses
    fell to the earth. Then, with their swords, they fought fiercely for the
    space of three hours. And at last, Sir Beaumains overcame his foe, and
    smote him to the ground. Then the Red Knight prayed his mercy, and said,
    "Slay me not, noble knight, and I will yield to thee with sixty knights
    that do my bidding." "All avails not," answered Sir Beaumains, "save this
    damsel pray me to release thee." Then did he lift his sword to slay him;
    but the damsel cried aloud, "Slay him not, Beaumains, for he is a noble
    knight." Then Sir Beaumains bade him rise up and thank the damsel, which
    straightway he did, and afterwards invited them to his castle, and made
    them goodly cheer.

    But notwithstanding all Sir Beaumains' mighty deeds, the damsel ceased not
    to revile and chide him, at which the Red Knight marvelled much; and
    caused his sixty knights to watch Sir Beaumains, that no villainy might
    happen to him. And on the morrow, they heard mass and broke their fast,
    and the Red Knight came before Sir Beaumains, with his sixty knights, and
    proffered him homage and fealty. "I thank thee," answered he; "and when I
    call upon thee thou shalt come before my lord King Arthur at his court,
    and yield yourselves to him." "That will we surely do," said the Red
    Knight. So Sir Beaumains and the damsel departed.

    And as she constantly reviled him and tormented him, he said to her,
    "Damsel, ye are discourteous thus always to rebuke me, for I have done you
    service; and for all your threats of knights that shall destroy me, all
    they who come lie in the dust before me. Now, therefore, I pray you
    rebuke me no more till you see me beaten or a recreant, and then bid me go
    from you." "There shall soon meet thee a knight who shall repay thee all
    thy deeds, thou boaster," answered she, "for, save King Arthur, he is the
    man of most worship in the world." "It will be the greater honour to
    encounter him," said Sir Beaumains.

    Soon after, they saw before them a city passing fair, and between them and
    the city was a meadow newly mown, wherein were many goodly tents. "Seest
    thou yonder blue pavilion?" said the damsel to Sir Beaumains; "it is Sir
    Perseant's, the lord of that great city, whose custom is, in all fair
    weather, to lie in this meadow, and joust with his knights."

    And as she spake, Sir Perseant, who had espied them coming, sent a
    messenger to meet Sir Beaumains, and to ask him if he came in war or
    peace. "Say to thy lord," he answered, "that I care not whether of the
    twain it be." So when the messenger gave this reply, Sir Perseant came out
    to fight with Sir Beaumains. And making ready, they rode their steeds
    against each other; and when their spears were shivered asunder, they
    fought with their swords. And for more than two hours did they hack and
    hew at each other, till their shields and hauberks were all dinted with
    many blows, and they themselves were sorely wounded. And at the last, Sir
    Beaumains smote Sir Perseant on the helm, so that he fell grovelling on
    the earth. And when he unlaced his helm to slay him, the damsel prayed for
    his life. "That will I grant gladly," answered Sir Beaumains, "for it were
    pity such a noble knight should die." "Grammercy!" said Sir Perseant,
    "for now I certainly know that it was thou who slewest my brother, the
    Black Knight, Sir Pereard; and overcame my brothers, the Green Knight, Sir
    Pertolope, and the Red Knight, Sir Perimones; and since thou hast overcome
    me also, I will do thee homage and fealty, and place at thy command one
    hundred knights to do thy bidding."

    But when the damsel saw Sir Perseant overthrown, she marvelled greatly at
    the might of Sir Beaumains, and said, "What manner of man may ye be, for
    now am I sure that ye be come of noble blood? And truly, never did woman
    revile knight as I have done thee, and yet ye have ever courteously borne
    with me, which surely never had been were ye not of gentle blood and
    lineage."

    "Lady," replied Sir Beaumains, "a knight is little worth who may not bear
    with a damsel; and so whatsoever ye said to me I took no heed, save only
    that at times when your scorn angered me, it made me all the stronger
    against those with whom I fought, and thus have ye furthered me in my
    battles. But whether I be born of gentle blood or no, I have done you
    gentle service, and peradventure will do better still, ere I depart from
    you."

    [Illustration: "Lady," replied Sir Beaumains, "a knight is little worth
    who may not bear with a damsel."]

    "Alas!" said she, weeping at his courtesy, "forgive me, fair Sir
    Beaumains, all that I have missaid and misdone against you." "With all my
    heart," said he; "and since you now speak fairly to me, I am passing glad
    of heart, and methinks I have the strength to overcome whatever knights I
    shall henceforth encounter."

    Then Sir Perseant prayed them to come to his pavilion, and set before them
    wines and spices, and made them great cheer. So they rested that night;
    and on the morrow, the damsel and Sir Beaumains rose, and heard mass. And
    when they had broken their fast, they took their leave of Sir Perseant.
    "Fair damsel," said he "whither lead ye this knight?" "Sir," answered she,
    "to the Castle Dangerous, where my sister is besieged by the Knight of the
    Redlands." "I know him well," said Sir Perseant, "for the most perilous
    knight alive - a man without mercy, and with the strength of seven men. God
    save thee, Sir Beaumains, from him! and enable thee to overcome him, for
    the Lady Lyones, whom he besiegeth, is as fair a lady as there liveth in
    this world." "Thou sayest truth, sir," said the damsel; "for I am her
    sister; and men call me Linet, or the Wild Maiden." "Now, I would have
    thee know," said Sir Perseant to Sir Beaumains, "that the Knight of the
    Redlands hath kept that siege more than two years, and prolongeth the time
    hoping that Sir Lancelot, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Lamoracke, may come and
    battle with him; for these three knights divide between them all
    knighthood; and thou if thou mayest match the Knight of the Redlands,
    shall well be called the fourth knight of the world." "Sir," said Sir
    Beaumains, "I would fain have that good fame; and truly, I am come of
    great and honourable lineage. And so that you and this fair damsel will
    conceal it, I will tell ye my descent." And when they swore to keep it
    secret, he told them, "My name is Sir Gareth of Orkney, my father was King
    Lot, and my mother the Lady Belisent, King Arthur's sister. Sir Gawain,
    Sir Agravain, and Sir Gaheris, are my brethren, and I am the youngest of
    them all. But, as yet King Arthur and the court know me not, who I am."
    When he had thus told them, they both wondered greatly.

    And the damsel Linet sent the dwarf forward to her sister, to tell her of
    their coming. Then did Dame Lyones inquire what manner of man the knight
    was who was coming to her rescue. And the dwarf told her of all Sir
    Beaumains' deeds by the way: how he had overthrown Sir Key, and left him
    for dead; how he had battled with Sir Lancelot, and was knighted of him;
    how he had fought with, and slain, the thieves; how he had overcome the
    two knights who kept the river passage; how he had fought with, and slain,
    the Black Knight; and how he had overcome the Green Knight, the Red
    Knight, and last of all, the Blue Knight, Sir Perseant. Then was Dame
    Lyones passing glad, and sent the dwarf back to Sir Beaumains with great
    gifts, thanking him for his courtesy, in taking such a labour on him for
    her sake, and praying him to be of good heart and courage. And as the
    dwarf returned, he met the Knight of the Redlands, who asked him whence he
    came. "I came here with the sister of my lady of the castle," said the
    dwarf, "who hath been now to King Arthur's court and brought a knight with
    her to take her battle on him." "Then is her travail lost," replied the
    knight; "for, though she had brought Sir Lancelot, Sir Tristram, Sir
    Lamoracke, or Sir Gawain, I count myself their equal, and who besides
    shall be so called?" Then the dwarf told the knight what deeds Sir
    Beaumains had done; but he answered, "I care not for him, whosoever he be,
    for I shall shortly overcome him, and give him shameful death, as to so
    many others I have done."

    Then the damsel Linet and Sir Beaumains left Sir Perseant, and rode on
    through a forest to a large plain, where they saw many pavilions, and hard
    by, a castle passing fair.

    But as they came near Sir Beaumains saw upon the branches of some trees
    which grew there, the dead bodies of forty knights hanging, with rich
    armour on them, their shields and swords about their necks, and golden
    spurs upon their heels. "What meaneth this?" said he, amazed. "Lose not
    thy courage, fair sir," replied the damsel, "at this shameful sight, for
    all these knights came hither to rescue my sister; and when the Knight of
    the Redlands had overcome them, he put them to this piteous death, without
    mercy; and in such wise will he treat thee also unless thou bearest thee
    more valiantly than they." "Truly he useth shameful customs," said Sir
    Beaumains; "and it is a marvel that he hath endured so long."

    So they rode onward to the castle walls, and found them double-moated, and
    heard the sea waves dashing on one side the walls. Then said the damsel,
    "See you that ivory horn hanging upon the sycamore-tree? The Knight of the
    Redlands hath hung it there, that any knight may blow thereon, and then
    will he himself come out and fight with him. But I pray thee sound it not
    till high noontide, for now it is but daybreak, and till noon his strength
    increases to the might of seven men." "Let that be as it may, fair
    damsel," answered he, "for were he stronger knight than ever lived, I
    would not fail him. Either will I defeat him at his mightiest, or die
    knightly in the field." With that he spurred his horse unto the sycamore,
    and blew the ivory horn so eagerly, that all the castle rang its echoes.
    Instantly, all the knights who were in the pavilions ran forth, and those
    within the castle looked out from the windows, or above the walls. And the
    Knight of the Redlands, arming himself quickly in blood-red armour, with
    spear, and shield, and horse's trappings of like colour, rode forth into a
    little valley by the castle walls, so that all in the castle, and at the
    siege, might see the battle.

    "Be of good cheer," said the damsel Linet to Sir Beaumains, "for thy
    deadly enemy now cometh; and at yonder window is my lady and sister, Dame
    Lyones." "In good sooth," said Sir Beaumains, "she is the fairest lady I
    have ever seen, and I would wish no better quarrel than to fight for her."
    With that, he looked up to the window, and saw the Lady Lyones, who waved
    her handkerchief to her sister and to him to cheer them. Then called the
    Knight of the Redlands to Sir Beaumains, "Leave now thy gazing, Sir
    knight, and turn to me, for I warn thee that lady is mine." "She loveth
    none of thy fellowship," he answered; "but know this, that I love her, and
    will rescue her from thee, or die." "Say ye so!" said the Red Knight.
    "Take ye no warning from those knights that hang on yonder trees?" "For
    shame that thou so boastest!" said Sir Beaumains. "Be sure that sight hath
    raised a hatred for thee that will not lightly be put out, and given me
    not fear, but rage." "Sir knight, defend thyself," said the Knight of the
    Redlands, "for we will talk no longer."

    Then did they put their spears in rest, and came together at the fullest
    speed of their horses, and smote each other in the midst of their shields,
    so that their horses' harness sundered by the shock, and they fell to the
    ground. And both lay there so long time, stunned, that many deemed their
    necks were broken. And all men said the strange knight was a strong man,
    and a noble jouster, for none had ever yet so matched the Knight of the
    Redlands. Then, in a while, they rose, and putting up their shields before
    them, drew their swords, and fought with fury, running at each other like
    wild beasts - now striking such buffets that both reeled backwards, now
    hewing at each other till they shore the harness off in pieces, and left
    their bodies naked and unarmed. And thus they fought till noon was past,
    when, for a time they rested to get breath, so sorely staggering and
    bleeding, that many who beheld them wept for pity. Then they renewed the
    battle - sometimes rushing so furiously together, that both fell to the
    ground, and anon changing swords in their confusion. Thus they endured,
    and lashed, and struggled, until eventide, and none who saw knew which was
    the likeliest to win; for though the Knight of the Redlands was a wily and
    subtle warrior, his subtlety made Sir Beaumains wilier and wiser too. So
    once again they rested for a little space, and took their helms off to
    find breath.

    But when Sir Beaumains' helm was off, he looked up to Dame Lyones, where
    she leaned, gazing and weeping, from her window. And when he saw the
    sweetness of her smiling, all his heart was light and joyful, and starting
    up, he bade the Knight of the Redlands make ready. Then did they lace
    their helms and fight together yet afresh, as though they had never fought
    before. And at the last, the Knight of the Redlands with a sudden stroke
    smote Sir Beaumains on the hand, so that his sword fell from it, and with
    a second stroke upon the helm he drove him to the earth. Then cried aloud
    the damsel Linet, "Alas! Sir Beaumains, see how my sister weepeth to
    behold thee fallen!" And when Sir Beaumains heard her words, he sprang
    upon his feet with strength, and leaping to his sword, he caught it; and
    with many heavy blows pressed so sorely on the Knight of the Redlands,
    that in the end he smote his sword from out his hand, and, with a mighty
    blow upon the head, hurled him upon the ground.

    Then Sir Beaumains unlaced his helm, and would have straightway slain him,
    but the Knight of the Redlands yielded, and prayed for mercy. "I may not
    spare thee," answered he, "because of the shameful death which thou hast
    given to so many noble knights." "Yet hold thy hand, Sir knight," said he,
    "and hear the cause. I loved once a fair damsel, whose brother was slain,
    as she told me, by a knight of Arthur's court, either Sir Lancelot, or Sir
    Gawain; and she prayed me, as I truly loved her, and by the faith of my
    knighthood, to labour daily in deeds of arms, till I should meet with him;
    and to put all knights of the Round Table whom I should overcome to a
    villainous death. And this I swore to her." Then prayed the earls, and
    knights, and barons, who stood round Sir Beaumains, to spare the Red
    Knight's life. "Truly," replied he, "I am loth to slay him,
    notwithstanding he hath done such shameful deeds. And inasmuch as what he
    did was done to please his lady and to gain her love, I blame him less,
    and for your sakes I will release him. But on this agreement only shall he
    hold his life - that straightway he depart into the castle, and yield him
    to the lady there, and make her such amends as she shall ask, for all the
    trespass he hath done upon her lands; and afterwards, that he shall go
    unto King Arthur's court, and ask the pardon of Sir Lancelot and Sir
    Gawain for all the evil he hath done against them." "All this, Sir knight,
    I swear to do," said the Knight of the Redlands; and therewith he did him
    homage and fealty.

    Then came the damsel Linet to Sir Beaumains and the Knight of the
    Redlands, and disarmed them, and staunched their wounds. And when the
    Knight of the Redlands had made amends for all his trespasses, he departed
    for the court.

    Then Sir Beaumains, being healed of his wounds, armed himself, and took
    his horse and spear and rode straight to the castle of Dame Lyones, for
    greatly he desired to see her. But when he came to the gate they closed it
    fast, and pulled the drawbridge up. And as he marvelled thereat, he saw
    the Lady Lyones standing at a window, who said, "Go thy way as yet, Sir
    Beaumains, for thou shalt not wholly have my love until thou be among the
    worthiest knights of all the world. Go, therefore, and labour yet in arms
    for twelve months more, and then return to me." "Alas! fair lady," said
    Sir Beaumains, "I have scarce deserved this of thee, for sure I am that I
    have bought thy love with all the best blood in my body." "Be not
    aggrieved, fair knight," said she, "for none of thy service is forgot or
    lost. Twelve months will soon be passed in noble deeds; and trust that to
    my death I shall love thee and not another." With that she turned and left
    the window.

    So Sir Beaumains rode away from the castle very sorrowrul at heart, and
    rode he knew not whither, and lay that night in a poor man's cottage. On
    the morrow he went forward, and came at noon to a broad lake, and thereby
    he alighted, being very sad and weary, and rested his head upon his
    shield, and told his dwarf to keep watch while he slept.

    Now, as soon as he had departed, the Lady Lyones repented, and greatly
    longed to see him back, and asked her sister many times of what lineage he
    was; but the damsel would not tell her, being bound by her oath to Sir
    Beaumains, and said his dwarf best knew, So she called Sir Gringamors,
    her brother, who dwelt with her, and prayed him to ride after Sir
    Beaumains till he found him sleeping, and then to take his dwarf away and
    bring him back to her. Anon Sir Gringamors departed, and rode till he came
    to Sir Beaumains, and found him as he lay sleeping by the water-side. Then
    stepping stealthily behind the dwarf he caught him in his arms and rode
    off in haste. And though the dwarf cried loudly to his lord for help, and
    woke Sir Beaumains, yet, though he rode full quickly after him, he could
    not overtake Sir Gringamors.

    When Dame Lyones saw her brother come back, she was passing glad of heart,
    and forthwith asked the dwarf his master's lineage. "He is a king's son,"
    said the dwarf, "and his mother is King Arthur's sister. His name is Sir
    Gareth of Orkney, and he is brother to the good knight, Sir Gawain. But I
    pray you suffer me to go back to my lord, for truly he will never leave
    this country till he have me again." But when the Lady Lyones knew her
    deliverer was come of such a kingly stock, she longed more than ever to
    see him again.

    Now as Sir Beaumains rode in vain to rescue his dwarf, he came to a fair
    green road and met a poor man of the country, and asked him had he seen a
    knight on a black horse, riding with a dwarf of a sad countenance behind
    him. "Yea," said the man, "I met with such a knight an hour agone, and his
    name is Sir Gringamors. He liveth at a castle two miles from hence; but he
    is a perilous knight, and I counsel ye not to follow him save ye bear him
    goodwill." Then Sir Beaumains followed the path which the poor man showed
    him, and came to the castle. And riding to the gate in great anger, he
    drew his sword, and cried aloud, "Sir Gringamors, thou traitor! deliver
    me my dwarf again, or by my knighthood it shall be ill for thee!" Then Sir
    Gringamors looked out of a window and said, "Sir Gareth of Orkney, leave
    thy boasting words, for thou wilt not get thy dwarf again." But the Lady
    Lyones said to her brother, "Nay brother, but I will that he have his
    dwarf, for he hath done much for me, and delivered me from the Knight of
    the Redlands, and well do I love him above all other knights." So Sir
    Gringamors went down to Sir Gareth and cried him mercy, and prayed him to
    alight and take good cheer.

    Then he alighted, and his dwarf ran to him. And when he was in the hall
    came the Lady Lyones dressed royally like a princess. And Sir Gareth was
    right glad of heart when he saw her. Then she told him how she had made
    her brother take away his dwarf and bring him back to her. And then she
    promised him her love, and faithfully to cleave to him and none other all
    the days of her life. And so they plighted their troth to each other. Then
    Sir Gringamors prayed him to sojourn at the castle, which willingly he
    did. "For," said he, "I have promised to quit the court for twelve months,
    though sure I am that in the meanwhile I shall be sought and found by my
    lord King Arthur and many others." So he sojourned long at the castle.

    Anon the knights, Sir Perseant, Sir Perimones, and Sir Pertolope, whom Sir
    Gareth had overthrown, went to King Arthur's court with all the knights
    who did them service, and told the king they had been conquered by a
    knight of his named Beaumains. And as they yet were talking, it was told
    the king there came another great lord with five hundred knights, who,
    entering in, did homage, and declared himself to be the Knight of the
    Redlands. "But my true name," said he, "is Ironside, and I am hither sent
    by one Sir Beaumains, who conquered me, and charged me to yield unto your
    grace." "Thou art welcome," said King Arthur, "for thou hast been long a
    foe to me and mine, and truly I am much beholden to the knight who sent
    thee. And now, Sir Ironside, if thou wilt amend thy life and hold of me, I
    will entreat thee as a friend, and make thee Knight of the Round Table;
    but thou mayst no more be a murderer of noble knights." Then the Knight of
    the Redlands knelt to the king, and told him of his promise to Sir
    Beaumains to use never more such shameful customs; and how he had so done
    but at the prayer of a lady whom he loved. Then knelt he to Sir Lancelot
    and Sir Gawain, and prayed their pardon for the hatred he had borne them.

    But the king and all the court marvelled greatly who Sir Beaumains was.
    "For," said the king, "he is a full noble knight." Then said Sir Lancelot,
    "Truly he is come of honourable blood, else had I not given him the order
    of knighthood; but he charged me that I should conceal his secret."

    Now as they talked thus it was told King Arthur that his sister, the Queen
    of Orkney, was come to the court with a great retinue of knights and
    ladies. Then was there great rejoicing, and the king rose and saluted his
    sister. And her sons, Sir Gawain, Sir Agravain, and Sir Gaheris knelt
    before her and asked her blessing, for during fifteen years last past they
    had not seen her. Anon she said, "Where is my youngest son, Sir Gareth?
    for I know that he was here a twelvemonth with you, and that ye made a
    kitchen knave of him. Then the king and all the knights knew that Sir
    Beaumains and Sir Gareth were the same. "Truly," said the king, "I knew
    him not." "Nor I," said Sir Gawain and both his brothers. Then said the
    king, "God be thanked, fair sister, that he is proved as worshipful a
    knight as any now alive, and by the grace of Heaven he shall be found
    forthwith if he be anywhere within these seven realms." Then said Sir
    Gawain and his brethren, "Lord, if ye will give us leave we will go seek
    him." But Sir Lancelot said, "It were better that the king should send a
    messenger to Dame Lyones and pray her to come hither with all speed, and
    she will counsel where ye shall find him." "It is well said," replied the
    king; and sent a messenger quickly unto Dame Lyones.

    When she heard the message she promised she would come forthwith, and told
    Sir Gareth what the messenger had said, and asked him what to do. "I pray
    you," said he, "tell them not where I am, but when my lord King Arthur
    asketh for me, advise him thus - that he proclaim a tournament before this
    castle on Assumption Day, and that the knight who proveth best shall win
    yourself and all your lands." So the Lady Lyones departed and came to King
    Arthur's court, and there was right nobly welcomed. And when they asked
    her where Sir Gareth was, she said she could not tell. "But, lord," said
    she, "with thy goodwill I will proclaim a tournament before my castle on
    the Feast of the Assumption, whereof the prize shall be myself and all my
    lands. Then if it be proclaimed that you, lord, and your knights will be
    there, I will find knights on my side to fight you and yours, and thus am
    I sure ye will hear tidings of Sir Gareth." "Be it so done," replied the
    king.

    So Sir Gareth sent messengers privily to Sir Perseant and Sir Ironside,
    and charged them to be ready on the day appointed, with their companies of
    knights to aid him and his party against the king. And when they were
    arrived he said, "Now be ye well assured that we shall be matched with the
    best knights of the world, and therefore must we gather all the good
    knights we can find."

    So proclamation was made throughout all England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland,
    and Cornwall, and in the out isles and other countries, that at the Feast
    of the Assumption of our Lady, next coming, all knights who came to joust
    at Castle Perilous should make choice whether they would side with the
    king or with the castle. Then came many good knights on the side of the
    castle. Sir Epinogris, the son of the King of Northumberland, and Sir
    Palomedes the Saracen, and Sir Grummore Grummorsum, a good knight of
    Scotland, and Sir Brian des Iles, a noble knight, and Sir Carados of the
    Tower Dolorous, and Sir Tristram, who as yet was not a knight of the Round
    Table, and many others. But none among them knew Sir Gareth, for he took
    no more upon him than any mean person.

    And on King Arthur's side there came the King of Ireland and the King of
    Scotland, the noble prince Sir Galahaut, Sir Gawain and his brothers Sir
    Agravain and Sir Gaheris, Sir Ewaine, Sir Tor, Sir Perceval, and Sir
    Lamoracke, Sir Lancelot also and his kindred, Sir Lionel, Sir Ector, Sir
    Bors and Sir Bedivere, likewise Sir Key and the most part of the Table
    Round. The two queens also, Queen Guinevere and the Queen of Orkney, Sir
    Gareth's mother, came with the king. So there was a great array both
    within and without the castle, with all manner of feasting and minstrelsy.

    Now before the tournament began, Sir Gareth privily prayed Dame Lyones,
    Sir Gringamors, Sir Ironside, and Sir Perseant, that they would in nowise
    disclose his name, nor make more of him than of any common knight. Then
    said Dame Lyones, "Dear lord, I pray thee take this ring, which hath the
    power to change the wearer's clothing into any colour he may will, and
    guardeth him from any loss of blood. But give it me again, I pray thee,
    when the tournament is done, for it greatly increaseth my beauty
    whensoever I wear it." "Grammercy, mine own lady," said Sir Gareth, "I
    wished for nothing better, for now I may be certainly disguised as long as
    I will." Then Sir Gringamors gave Sir Gareth a bay courser that was a
    passing good horse, with sure armour, and a noble sword, won by his father
    from a heathen tyrant. And then every knight made him ready for the
    tournament.

    So on the day of the Assumption, when mass and matins were said, the
    heralds blew their trumpets and sounded for the tourney. Anon came out the
    knights of the castle and the knights of King Arthur, and matched
    themselves together.

    Then Sir Epinogris, son of the King of Northumberland, a knight of the
    castle, encountered Sir Ewaine, and both broke off their spears short to
    their hands. Then came Sir Palomedes from the castle, and met Sir Gawain,
    and they so hardly smote each other, that both knights and horses fell to
    the earth. Then Sir Tristram, from the castle, encountered with Sir
    Bedivere, and smote him to the earth, horse and man. Then the Knight of
    the Redlands and Sir Gareth met with Sir Bors and Sir Bleoberis; and the
    Knight of the Redlands and Sir Bors smote together so hard that their
    spears burst, and their horses fell grovelling to the ground. And Sir
    Bleoberis brake his spear upon Sir Gareth, but himself was hurled upon
    the ground. When Sir Galihodin saw that, he bade Sir Gareth keep him, but
    Sir Gareth lightly smote him to the earth. Then Sir Galihud got a spear to
    avenge his brother, but was served in like manner. And Sir Dinadam, and
    his brother La-cote-male-taile, and Sir Sagramour le Desirous, and Dodinas
    le Savage, he bore down all with one spear.

    When King Anguish of Ireland saw this, he marvelled what that knight could
    be who seemed at one time green and at another blue; for so at every
    course he changed his colour that none might know him. Then he ran towards
    him and encountered him, and Sir Gareth smote the king from his horse,
    saddle and all. And in like manner he served the King of Scotland, and
    King Urience of Gore, and King Bagdemagus.

    Then Sir Galahaut, the noble prince, cried out, "Knight of the many
    colours! thou hast jousted well; now make thee ready to joust with me."
    When Sir Gareth heard him, he took a great spear and met him swiftly. And
    the prince's spear broke off, but Sir Gareth smote him on the left side of
    the helm, so that he reeled here and there, and had fallen down had not
    his men recovered him. "By my faith," said King Arthur, "that knight of
    the many colours is a good knight. I pray thee, Sir Lancelot du Lake,
    encounter with him." "Lord," said Sir Lancelot, "by thy leave I will
    forbear. I find it in my heart to spare him at this time, for he hath done
    enough work for one day; and when a good knight doth so well it is no
    knightly part to hinder him from this honour. And peradventure his quarrel
    is here to-day, and he may be the best beloved of the Lady Lyones of all
    that be here; for I see well he paineth and forceth himself to do great
    deeds. Therefore, as for me, this day he shall have the honour; for
    though I were able to put him from it, I would not." "You speak well and
    truly," said the king.

    Then after the tilting, they drew swords, and there began a great
    tournament, and there Sir Lancelot did marvellous deeds of arms, for first
    he fought with both Sir Tristram and Sir Carados, albeit they were the
    most perilous in all the world. Then came Sir Gareth and put them asunder,
    but would not smite a stroke against Sir Lancelot, for by him he had been
    knighted. Anon Sir Gareth's helm had need of mending, and he rode aside to
    see to it and to drink water, for he was sore athirst with all his mighty
    feats of strength. And while he drank, his dwarf said to him, "Give me
    your ring, lest ye lose it while ye drink." So Sir Gareth took it off. And
    when he had finished drinking, he rode back eagerly to the field, and in
    his haste forgot to take the ring again. Then all the people saw that he
    wore yellow armour. And King Arthur told a herald, "Ride and espy the
    cognizance of that brave knight, for I have asked many who he is, and none
    can tell me."

    Then the herald rode near, and saw written round about his helmet in
    letters of gold, "Sir Gareth of Orkney." And instantly the herald cried
    his name aloud, and all men pressed to see him.

    But when he saw he was discovered, he pushed with haste through all the
    crowd, and cried to his dwarf, Boy, thou hast beguiled me foully in
    keeping my ring; give it me again, that I may be hidden." And as soon as
    he had put it on, his armour changed again, and no man knew where he had
    gone. Then he passed forth from the field; but Sir Gawain, his brother,
    rode after him.

    And when Sir Gareth had ridden far into the forest, he took off his ring,
    and sent it back by the dwarf to the Lady Lyones, praying her to be true
    and faithful to him while he was away.

    Then rode Sir Gareth long through the forest, till night fell, and coming
    to a castle he went up to the gate, and prayed the porter to let him in.
    But churlishly he answered "that he should not lodge there." Then said Sir
    Gareth, "Tell thy lord and lady that I am a knight of King Arthur's court,
    and for his sake I pray their shelter." With that the porter went to the
    duchess who owned the castle. "Let him in straightway," cried she; "for
    the king's sake he shall not be harbourless!" and went down to receive
    him. When Sir Gareth saw her coming, he saluted her, and said, "Fair lady,
    I pray you give me shelter for this night, and if there be here any
    champion or giant with whom I must needs fight, spare me till to-morrow,
    when I and my horse shall have rested, for we are full weary." "Sir
    knight," she said, "thou speakest boldly; for the lord of this castle is a
    foe to King Arthur and his court, and if thou wilt rest here to-night thou
    must agree, that wheresoever thou mayest meet my lord, thou must yield to
    him as a prisoner." "What is thy lord's name, lady?" said Sir Gareth. "The
    Duke de la Rowse," said she. "I will promise thee," said he, "to yield to
    him, if he promise to do me no harm; but if he refuse, I will release
    myself with my sword and spear."

    "It is well," said the duchess; and commanded the drawbridge to be let
    down. So he rode into the hall and alighted. And when he had taken off his
    armour, the duchess and her ladies made him passing good cheer. And after
    supper his bed was made in the hall, and there he rested that night. On
    the morrow he rose and heard mass, and having broken his fast, took his
    leave and departed.

    [Illustration: So he rode into the hall and alighted.]

    And as he rode past a certain mountain there met him a knight named Sir
    Bendelaine, and cried unto him "Thou shalt not pass unless thou joust with
    me or be my prisoner!" "Then will we joust," replied Sir Gareth. So they
    let their horses run at full speed, and Sir Gareth smote Sir Bendelaine
    through his body so sorely that he scarcely reached his castle ere he fell
    dead. And as Sir Gareth presently came by the castle, Sir Bendelaine's
    knights and servants rode out to revenge their lord. And twenty of them
    fell on him at once, although his spear was broken. But drawing his sword
    he put his shield before him. And though they brake their spears upon him,
    one and all, and sorely pressed on him, yet ever he defended himself like
    a noble knight. Anon, finding they could not overcome him, they agreed to
    slay his horse; and having killed it with their spears, they set upon Sir
    Gareth as he fought on foot. But every one he struck he slew, and drave at
    them with fearful blows, till he had slain them all but four, who fled.
    Then taking the horse of one of those that lay there dead, he rode upon
    his way.

    Anon he came to another castle and heard from within a sound as of many
    women moaning and weeping. Then said he to a page who stood without, "What
    noise is this I hear?" "Sir knight," said he, "there be within thirty
    ladies, the widows of thirty knights who have been slain by the lord of
    this castle. He is called the Brown Knight without pity, and is the most
    perilous knight living, wherefore I warn thee to flee." "That will I never
    do," said Sir Gareth, "for I fear him not." Then the page saw the Brown
    Knight coming and said to Gareth, "Lo! my lord is near."

    So both knights made them ready and galloped their horses towards each
    other, and the Brown Knight brake his spear upon Sir Gareth's shield; but
    Sir Gareth smote him through the body so that he fell dead. At that he
    rode into the castle and told the ladies he had slain their foe. Then were
    they right glad of heart and made him all the cheer they could, and
    thanked him out of measure. But on the morrow as he went to mass he found
    the ladies weeping in the chapel upon divers tombs that were there. And he
    knew that in those tombs their husbands lay. Then he bade them be
    comforted, and with noble and high words he desired and prayed them all to
    be at Arthur's court on the next Feast of Pentecost.

    So he departed and rode past a mountain where was a goodly knight waiting,
    who said to him, "Abide, Sir knight, and joust with me!" "How are ye
    named?" said Sir Gareth. "I am the Duke de la Rowse," answered he. "In
    good sooth," then said Sir Gareth, "not long ago I lodged within your
    castle, and there promised I would yield to you whenever we might meet."
    "Art thou that proud knight," said the duke, "who was ready to fight with
    me? Guard thyself therefore and make ready." So they ran together, and Sir
    Gareth smote the duke from his horse. Then they alighted and drew their
    swords, and fought full sorely for the space of an hour; and at the last
    Sir Gareth smote the duke to the earth and would have slain him, but he
    yielded. "Then must ye go," said Sir Gareth, "to my lord King Arthur at
    the next Feast of Pentecost and say that I, Sir Gareth, sent ye." "As ye
    will be it," said the duke; and gave him up his shield for pledge.

    And as Sir Gareth rode alone he saw an armed knight coming towards him.
    And putting the duke's shield before him he rode fast to tilt with him;
    and so they ran together as it had been thunder, and brake their spears
    upon each other. Then fought they fiercely with their swords and lashed
    together with such mighty strokes that blood ran to the ground on every
    side. And after they had fought together for two hours and more, it
    chanced the damsel Linet passed that way; and when she saw them she cried
    out, "Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth, leave your fighting, for ye are
    brethren!" At that they threw away their shields and swords, and took each
    other in their arms and wept a great while ere they could speak. And each
    gave to the other the honour of the battle, and there was many a kind word
    between them. Then said Sir Gawain, "O my brother, for your sake have I
    had great sorrow and labour! But truly I would honour you though ye were
    not my brother, for ye have done great worship to King Arthur and his
    court, and sent more knights to him than any of the Table Round, except
    Sir Lancelot."

    Then the damsel Linet staunched their wounds, and their horses being weary
    she rode her palfrey to King Arthur and told him of this strange
    adventure. When she had told her tidings, the king himself mounted his
    horse and bade all come with him to meet them. So a great company of lords
    and ladies went forth to meet the brothers. And when King Arthur saw them
    he would have spoken hearty words, but for gladness he could not. And both
    Sir Gawain and Sir Gareth fell down at their uncle's knees and did him
    homage, and there was passing great joy and gladness among them all.

    Then said the king to the damsel Linet, "Why cometh not the Lady Lyones to
    visit her knight, Sir Gareth, who hath had such travail for her love?"
    "She knoweth not, my lord, that he is here," replied the damsel, "for
    truly she desireth greatly to see him." "Go ye and bring her hither,"
    said the king. So the damsel rode to tell her sister where Sir Gareth was,
    and when she heard it she rejoiced full heartily and came with all the
    speed she could. And when Sir Gareth saw her, there was great joy and
    comfort between them.

    Then the king asked Sir Gareth whether he would have that lady for his
    wife? "My lord," replied Sir Gareth, "know well that I love her above all
    ladies living." "Now, fair lady," said King Arthur, "what say ye?" "Most
    noble king," she answered, "my lord, Sir Gareth, is my first love and
    shall be my last, and if I may not have him for my husband I will have
    none." Then said the king to them, "Be well assured that for my crown I
    would not be the cause of parting your two hearts."

    Then was high preparation made for the marriage, for the king desired it
    should be at the Michaelmas next following, at Kinkenadon-by-the-Sea.

    So Sir Gareth sent out messages to all the knights whom he had overcome in
    battle that they should be there upon his marriage-day.

    Therefore, at the next Michaelmas, came a goodly company to
    Kinkenadon-by-the-Sea. And there did the Archbishop of Canterbury marry
    Sir Gareth and the Lady Lyones with all solemnity. And all the knights
    whom Sir Gareth had overcome were at the feast; and every manner of revels
    and games was held with music and minstrelsy. And there was a great
    jousting for three days. But because of his bride the king would not
    suffer Sir Gareth to joust. Then did King Arthur give great lands and
    fair, with store of gold, to Sir Gareth and his wife, that so they might
    live royally together to their lives' end.




    CHAPTER XI

    _The Adventures of Sir Tristram of Lyonesse_


    Again King Arthur held high festival at Caerleon, at Pentecost, and
    gathered round him all the fellowship of the Round Table, and so,
    according to his custom, sat and waited till some adventure should arise,
    or some knight return to court whose deeds and perils might be told.

    Anon he saw Sir Lancelot and a crowd of knights coming through the doors
    and leading in their midst the mighty knight, Sir Tristram. As soon as
    King Arthur saw him, he rose up and went through half the hall, and held
    out both his hands and cried, "Right welcome to thee, good Sir Tristram,
    as welcome art thou as any knight that ever came before into this court. A
    long time have I wished for thee amongst my fellowship." Then all the
    knights and barons rose up with one accord and came around, and cried out,
    "Welcome." Queen Guinevere came also, and many ladies with her, and all
    with one voice said the same.

    Then the king took Sir Tristram by the hand and led him to the Round Table
    and said, "Welcome again for one of the best and gentlest knights in all
    the world; a chief in war, a chief in peace, a chief in field and forest,
    a chief in the ladies' chamber - right heartily welcome to this court, and
    mayest thou long abide in it."

    When he had so said he looked at every empty seat until he came to what
    had been Sir Marhaus', and there he found written in gold letters, "This
    is the seat of the noble knight, Sir Tristram." Whereat they made him,
    with great cheer and gladness, a Fellow of the Round Table.

    Now the story of Sir Tristram was as follows: -

    There was a king of Lyonesse, named Meliodas, married to the sister of
    King Mark of Cornwall, a right fair lady and a good. And so it happened
    that King Meliodas hunting in the woods was taken by enchantment and made
    prisoner in a castle. When his wife Elizabeth heard it she was nigh mad
    with grief, and ran into the forest to seek out her lord. But after many
    days of wandering and sorrow she found no trace of him, and laid her down
    in a deep valley and prayed to meet her death. And so indeed she did, but
    ere she died she gave birth in the midst of all her sorrow to a child, a
    boy, and called him with her latest breath Tristram; for she said, "His
    name shall show how sadly he hath come into this world."

    Therewith she gave up her ghost, and the gentlewoman who was with her took
    the child and wrapped it from the cold as well as she was able, and lay
    down with it in her arms beneath the shadow of a tree hard by, expecting
    death to come to her in turn.

    But shortly after came a company of lords and barons seeking for the
    queen, and found the lady and the child and took them home. And on the
    next day came King Meliodas, whom Merlin had delivered, and when he heard
    of the queen's death his sorrow was greater than tongue can tell. And anon
    he buried her solemnly and nobly, and called the child Tristram as she had
    desired.

    Then for seven years King Meliodas mourned and took no comfort, and all
    that time young Tristram was well nourished; but in a while he wedded with
    the daughter of Howell, King of Brittany, who, that her own children might
    enjoy the kingdom, cast about in her mind how she might destroy Tristram.
    So on a certain day she put poison in a silver cup, where Tristram and her
    children were together playing, that when he was athirst he might drink of
    it and die. But so it happened that her own son saw the cup, and, thinking
    it must hold good drink, he climbed and took it, and drank deeply of it,
    and suddenly thereafter burst and fell down dead.

    When the queen heard that, her grief was very great, but her anger and
    envy were fiercer than before, and soon again she put more poison in the
    cup. And by chance one day her husband finding it when thirsty, took it up
    and was about to drink therefrom, when, seeing him, she sprang up with a
    mighty cry and dashed it from his hands.

    At that King Meliodas, wondering greatly, called to mind the sudden death
    of his young child, and taking her fiercely by the hand he cried:

    "Traitress, tell me what drink is in this cup or I will slay thee in a
    moment;" and therewith pulling out his sword he swore by a great oath to
    slay her if she straightway told him not the truth.

    "Ah, mercy, lord," said she, and fell down at his feet; "mercy, and I will
    tell thee all."

    And then she told him of her plot to murder Tristram, that her own sons
    might enjoy the kingdom.

    "The law shall judge thee," said the king.

    And so anon she was tried before the barons, and condemned to be burnt to
    death.

    But when the fire was made, and she brought out, came Tristram kneeling at
    his father's feet and besought of him a favour.

    "Whatsoever thou desirest I will give thee," said the king.

    "Give me the life, then, of the queen, my stepmother," said he.

    "Thou doest wrong to ask it," said Meliodas; "for she would have slain
    thee with her poisons if she could, and chiefly for thy sake she ought to
    die."

    "Sir," said he, "as for that, I beseech thee of thy mercy to forgive it
    her, and for my part may God pardon her as I do; and so I pray thee grant
    me my boon, and for God's sake hold thee to thy promise."

    "If it must be so," said the king, "take thou her life, for to thee I give
    it, and go and do with her as thou wilt."

    Then went young Tristram to the fire and loosed the queen from all her
    bonds and delivered her from death.

    And after a great while by his good means the king again forgave and lived
    in peace with her, though never more in the same lodgings.

    Anon was Tristram sent abroad to France in care of one named Governale.
    And there for seven years he learned the language of the land, and all
    knightly exercises and gentle crafts, and especially was he foremost in
    music and in hunting, and was a harper beyond all others. And when at
    nineteen years of age he came back to his father, he was as lusty and
    strong of body and as noble of heart as ever man was seen.

    Now shortly after his return it befell that King Anguish of Ireland sent
    to King Mark of Cornwall for the tribute due to Ireland, but which was now
    seven years behindhand. To whom King Mark sent answer, if he would have it
    he must send and fight for it, and they would find a champion to fight
    against it.

    So King Anguish called for Sir Marhaus, his wife's brother, a good knight
    of the Round Table, who lived then at his court, and sent him with a
    knightly retinue in six great ships to Cornwall. And, casting anchor by
    the castle of Tintagil, he sent up daily to King Mark for the tribute or
    the champion. But no knight there would venture to assail him, for his
    fame was very high in all the realm for strength and hardihood.

    Then made King Mark a proclamation throughout Cornwall, that if any knight
    would fight Sir Marhaus he should stand at the king's right hand for
    evermore, and have great honour and riches all the rest of his days. Anon
    this news came to the land of Lyonesse, and when young Tristram heard it
    he was angry and ashamed to think no knight of Cornwall durst assail the
    Irish champion. "Alas," said he, "that I am not a knight, that I might
    match this Marhaus! I pray you give me leave, sir, to depart to King
    Mark's court and beg of his grace to make me knight."

    "Be ruled by thy own courage," said his father.

    So Tristram rode away forthwith to Tintagil to King Mark, and went up
    boldly to him and said, "Sir, give me the order of knighthood and I will
    fight to the uttermost with Sir Marhaus of Ireland."

    "What are ye, and whence come ye?" said the king, seeing he was but a
    young man, though strong and well made both in body and limb.

    "My name is Tristram," said he, "and I was born in the country of
    Lyonesse."

    "But know ye," said the king, "this Irish knight will fight with none who
    be not come of royal blood and near of kin to kings or queens, as he
    himself is, for his sister is the Queen of Ireland."

    Then said Tristram, "Let him know that I am come both on my father's and
    my mother's side of blood as good as his, for my father is King Meliodas
    and my mother was that Queen Elizabeth, thy sister, who died in the forest
    at my birth."

    When King Mark heard that he welcomed him with all his heart, and knighted
    him forthwith, and made him ready to go forth as soon as he would choose,
    and armed him royally in armour covered with gold and silver.

    Then he sent Sir Marhaus word, "That a better man than he should fight
    with him, Sir Tristram of Lyonesse, son of King Meliodas and of King
    Mark's own sister." So the battle was ordained to be fought in an island
    near Sir Marhaus' ships, and there Sir Tristram landed on the morrow, with
    Governale alone attending him for squire, and him he sent back to the land
    when he had made himself ready.

    When Sir Marhaus and Sir Tristram were thus left alone, Sir Marhaus said,
    "Young knight Sir Tristram what doest thou here? I am full sorry for thy
    rashness, for ofttimes have I been assailed in vain, and by the best
    knights of the world. Be warned in time, return to them that sent thee."

    "Fair knight, and well-proved knight," replied Sir Tristram, "be sure that
    I shall never quit this quarrel till one of us be overcome. For this cause
    have I been made knight, and thou shalt know before we part that though as
    yet unproved, I am a king's son and first-born of a queen. Moreover I have
    promised to deliver Cornwall from this ancient burden, or to die. Also,
    thou shouldst have known, Sir Marhaus, that thy valour and thy might are
    but the better reasons why I should assail thee; for whether I win or lose
    I shall gain honour to have met so great a knight as thou art."

    Then they began the battle, and tilted at their hardest against each
    other, so that both knights and horses fell to the earth. But Sir Marhaus'
    spear smote Sir Tristram a great wound in the side. Then, springing up
    from their horses, they lashed together with their swords like two wild
    boars. And when they had stricken together a great while they left off
    strokes and lunged at one another's breasts and visors; but seeing this
    availed not they hurtled together again to bear each other down.

    [Illustration: Then they began the battle, and tilted at their hardest
    against each other.]

    Thus fought they more than half the day, till both were sorely spent and
    blood ran from them to the ground on every side. But by this time Sir
    Tristram remained fresher than Sir Marhaus and better winded, and with a
    mighty stroke he smote him such a buffet as cut through his helm into his
    brain-pan, and there his sword stuck in so fast that thrice Sir Tristram
    pulled ere he could get it from his head. Then fell Sir Marhaus down upon
    his knees, and the edge of Sir Tristram's sword broke off into his
    brain-pan. And suddenly when he seemed dead, Sir Marhaus rose and threw
    his sword and shield away from him and ran and fled into his ship. And
    Tristram cried out after him, "Aha! Sir knight of the Round Table, dost
    thou withdraw thee from so young a knight? it is a shame to thee and all
    thy kin; I would rather have been hewn into a hundred pieces than have
    fled from thee."

    But Sir Marhaus answered nothing, and sorely groaning fled away.

    "Farewell, Sir knight, farewell," laughed Tristram, whose own voice now
    was hoarse and faint with loss of blood; "I have thy sword and shield in
    my safe keeping, and will wear them in all places where I ride on my
    adventures, and before King Arthur and the Table Round."

    Then was Sir Marhaus taken back to Ireland by his company; and as soon as
    he arrived his wounds were searched, and when they searched his head they
    found therein a piece of Tristram's sword; but all the skill of surgeons
    was in vain to move it out. So anon Sir Marhaus died.

    But the queen, his sister, took the piece of sword-blade and put it safely
    by, for she thought that some day it might help her to revenge her
    brother's death.

    Meanwhile, Sir Tristram, being sorely wounded, sat down softly on a little
    mound and bled passing fast; and in that evil case was found anon by
    Governale and King Mark's knights. Then they gently took him up and
    brought him in a barge back to the land, and lifted him into a bed within
    the castle, and had his wounds dressed carefully.

    But for a great while he lay sorely sick, and was likely to have died of
    the first stroke Sir Marhaus had given him with the spear, for the point
    of it was poisoned. And, though the wisest surgeons and leeches - both men
    and women - came from every part, yet could he be by no means cured. At
    last came a wise lady, and said plainly that Sir Tristram never should be
    healed, until he went and stayed in that same country whence the poison
    came. When this was understood, the king sent Sir Tristram in a fair and
    goodly ship to Ireland, and by fortune he arrived fast by a castle where
    the king and queen were. And as the ship was being anchored, he sat upon
    his bed and harped a merry lay, and made so sweet a music as was never
    equalled.

    When the king heard that the sweet harper was a wounded knight, he sent
    for him, and asked his name. "I am of the country of Lyonesse," he
    answered, "and my name is Tramtrist;" for he dared not tell his true name
    lest the vengeance of the queen should fall upon him for her brother's
    death.

    "Well," said King Anguish, "thou art right welcome here, and shalt have
    all the help this land can give thee; but be not anxious if I am at times
    cast down and sad, for but lately in Cornwall the best knight in the
    world, fighting for my cause, was slain; his name was Sir Marhaus, a
    knight of King Arthur's Round Table." And then he told Sir Tristram all
    the story of Sir Marhaus' battle, and Sir Tristram made pretence of great
    surprise and sorrow, though he knew all far better than the king himself.

    Then was he put in charge of the king's daughter, La Belle Isault, to be
    healed of his wound, and she was as fair and noble a lady as men's eyes
    might see. And so marvellously was she skilled in medicine, that in a few
    days she fully cured him; and in return Sir Tristram taught her the harp;
    so, before long, they two began to love each other greatly.

    But at that time a heathen knight, Sir Palomedes, was in Ireland, and much
    cherished by the king and queen. He also loved mightily La Belle Isault,
    and never wearied of making her great gifts, and seeking for her favour,
    and was ready even to be christened for her sake. Sir Tristram therefore
    hated him out of measure, and Sir Palomedes was full of rage and envy
    against Tristram.

    And so it befell that King Anguish proclaimed a great tournament to be
    held, the prize whereof should be a lady called the Lady of the Launds, of
    near kindred to the king: and her the winner of the tournament should wed
    in three days afterwards, and possess all her lands. When La Belle Isault
    told Sir Tristram of this tournament, he said, "Fair lady! I am yet a
    feeble knight, and but for thee had been a dead man now: what wouldest
    thou I should do? Thou knowest well I may not joust."

    "Ah, Tristram," said she, "why wilt thou not fight in this tournament? Sir
    Palomedes will be there, and will do his mightiest; and therefore be thou
    there, I pray thee, or else he will be winner of the prize."

    "Madam," said Tristram, "I will go, and for thy sake will do my best; but
    let me go unknown to all men; and do thou, I pray thee, keep my counsel,
    and help me to a disguise."

    So on the day of jousting came Sir Palomedes, with a black shield, and
    overthrew many knights. And all the people wondered at his prowess; for on
    the first day he put to the worse Sir Gawain, Sir Gaheris, Sir Agravaine,
    Sir Key, and many more from far and near. And on the morrow he was
    conqueror again, and overthrew the king with a hundred knights and the
    King of Scotland. But presently Sir Tristram rode up to the lists, having
    been let out at a privy postern of the castle, where none could see. La
    Belle Isault had dressed him in white armour and given him a white horse
    and shield, and so he came suddenly into the field as it had been a bright
    angel.

    As soon as Sir Palomedes saw him he ran at him with a great spear in rest,
    but Sir Tristram was ready, and at the first encounter hurled him to the
    ground. Then there arose a great cry that the knight with the black shield
    was overthrown. And Palomedes sorely hurt and shamed, sought out a secret
    way and would have left the field; but Tristram watched him, and rode
    after him, and bade him stay, for he had not yet done with him. Then did
    Sir Palomedes turn with fury, and lash at Sir Tristram with his sword; but
    at the first stroke Sir Tristram smote him to the earth, and cried, "Do
    now all my commands, or take thy death." Then he yielded to Sir Tristram's
    mercy, and promised to forsake La Belle Isault, and for twelve months to
    wear no arms or armour. And rising up, he cut his armour off him into
    shreds with rage and madness, and turned and left the field: and Sir
    Tristram also left the lists, and rode back to the castle through the
    postern gate.

    Then was Sir Tristram long cherished by the King and Queen of Ireland, and
    ever with La Belle Isault. But on a certain day, while he was bathing,
    came the queen with La Belle Isault by chance into his chamber, and saw
    his sword lie naked on the bed: anon she drew it from the scabbard and
    looked at it a long while, and both thought it a passing fair sword; but
    within a foot and a half of the end there was a great piece broken out,
    and while the queen was looking at the gap, she suddenly remembered the
    piece of sword-blade that was found in the brain-pan of her brother Sir
    Marhaus.

    Therewith she turned and cried, "By my faith, this is the felon knight who
    slew thy uncle!" And running to her chamber she sought in her casket for
    the piece of iron from Sir Marhaus' head and brought it back, and fitted
    it in Tristram's sword; and surely did it fit therein as closely as it had
    been but yesterday broke out.

    [Illustration: And running to her chamber, she sought in her casket for
    the piece of iron ... and fitted it in Tristram's sword.]

    Then the queen caught the sword up fiercely in her hand, and ran into the
    room where Sir Tristram was yet in his bath, and making straight for him,
    had run him through the body, had not his squire, Sir Hebes, got her in
    his arms, and pulled the sword away from her.

    Then ran she to the king, and fell upon her knees before him, saying,
    "Lord and husband, thou hast here in thy house that felon knight who slew
    my brother Marhaus!"

    "Who is it?" said the king.

    "It is Sir Tristram!" said she, "whom Isault hath healed."

    "Alas!" replied the king, "I am full grieved thereat, for he is a good
    knight as ever I have seen in any field; but I charge thee leave thou him,
    and let me deal with him."

    Then the king went to Sir Tristram's chamber and found him all armed and
    ready to mount his horse, and said to him, "Sir Tristram, it is not to
    prove me against thee I come, for it were shameful of thy host to seek thy
    life. Depart in peace, but tell me first thy name, and whether thou
    slewest my brother, Sir Marhaus."

    Then Sir Tristram told him all the truth, and how he had hid his name, to
    be unknown in Ireland; and when he had ended, the king declared he held
    him in no blame. "Howbeit, I cannot for mine honour's sake retain thee at
    this court, for so I should displease my barons, and my wife, and all her
    kin."

    "Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I thank thee for the goodness thou hast shown
    me here, and for the great goodness my lady, thy daughter, hath shown me;
    and it may chance to be more for thy advantage if I live than if I die;
    for wheresoever I may be, I shall ever seek thy service, and shall be my
    lady thy daughter's servant in all places, and her knight in right and
    wrong, and shall never fail to do for her as much as knight can do."

    Then Sir Tristram went to La Belle Isault, and took his leave of her. "O
    gentle knight," said she, "full of grief am I at your departing, for never
    yet I saw a man to love so well."

    "Madam," said he, "I promise faithfully that all my life I shall be your
    knight."

    Then Sir Tristram gave her a ring, and she gave him another, and after
    that he left her, weeping and lamenting, and went among the barons, and
    openly took his leave of them all, saying, "Fair lords, it so befalleth
    that I now must depart hence; therefore, if there be any here whom I have
    offended or who is grieved with me, let him now say it, and before I go I
    will amend it to the utmost of my power. And if there be but one who
    would speak shame of me behind my back, let him say it now or never, and
    here is my body to prove it on - body against body."

    And all stood still and said no word, though some there were of the
    queen's kindred who would have assailed him had they dared.

    So Sir Tristram departed from Ireland and took the sea and came with a
    fair wind to Tintagil. And when the news came to King Mark that Sir
    Tristram was returned, healed of his wound, he was passing glad, and so
    were all his barons. And when he had visited the king his uncle, he rode
    to his father, King Meliodas, and there had all the heartiest welcome that
    could be made him. And both the king and queen gave largely to him of
    their lands and goods.

    Anon he came again to King Mark's court, and there lived in great joy and
    pleasure, till within a while the king grew jealous of his fame, and of
    the love and favour shown him by all damsels. And as long as King Mark
    lived, he never after loved Sir Tristram, though there was much fair
    speech between them.

    Then it befell upon a certain day that the good knight Sir Bleoberis de
    Ganis, brother to Sir Blamor de Ganis, and nigh cousin to Sir Lancelot of
    the Lake, came to King Mark's court and asked of him a favour. And though
    the king marvelled, seeing he was a man of great renown, and a knight of
    the Round Table, he granted him all his asking. Then said Sir Bleoberis,
    "I will have the fairest lady in your court, at my own choosing."

    "I may not say thee nay," replied the king; "choose therefore, but take
    all the issues of thy choice."

    So when he had looked around, he chose the wife of Earl Segwarides, and
    took her by the hand, and set her upon horseback behind his squire, and
    rode forth on his way.

    Presently thereafter came in the earl, and rode out straightway after him
    in rage. But all the ladies cried out shame upon Sir Tristram that he had
    not gone, and one rebuked him foully and called him coward knight, that he
    would stand and see a lady forced away from his uncle's court. But Sir
    Tristram answered her, "Fair lady, it is not my place to take part in this
    quarrel while her lord and husband is here to do it. Had he not been at
    this court, peradventure I had been her champion. And if it so befall that
    he speed ill, then may it happen that I speak with that foul knight before
    he pass out of this realm."

    Anon ran in one of Sir Segwarides' squires, and told that his master was
    sore wounded, and at the point of death. When Sir Tristram heard that, he
    was soon armed and on his horse, and Governale, his servant, followed him
    with shield and spear.

    And as he rode, he met his cousin Sir Andret, who had been commanded by
    King Mark to bring home to him two knights of King Arthur's court who
    roamed the country thereabouts seeking adventures.

    "What tidings?" said Sir Tristram.

    "God help me, never worse," replied his cousin; "for those I went to bring
    have beaten and defeated me, and set my message at naught."

    "Fair cousin," said Sir Tristram, "ride ye on your way, perchance if I
    should meet them ye may be revenged."

    So Sir Andret rode into Cornwall, but Sir Tristram rode after the two
    knights who had misused him, namely, Sir Sagramour le Desirous, and Sir
    Dodinas le Savage. And before long he saw them but a little way before
    him.

    "Sir," said Governale, "by my advice thou wilt leave them alone, for they
    be two well-proved knights of Arthur's court."

    "Shall I not therefore rather meet them?" said Sir Tristram, and, riding
    swiftly after them, he called to them to stop, and asked them whence they
    came, and whither they were going, and what they were doing in those
    marches.

    Sir Sagramour looked haughtily at Sir Tristram, and made mocking of his
    words, and said, "Fair knight, be ye a knight of Cornwall?"

    "Wherefore askest thou that?" said Tristram.

    "Truly, because it is full seldom seen," replied Sir Sagramour, "that
    Cornish knights are valiant with their arms as with their tongues. It is
    but two hours since there met us such a Cornish knight, who spoke great
    words with might and prowess, but anon, with little mastery, he was laid
    on earth, as I trow wilt thou be also."

    "Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "it may chance I be a better man than he;
    but, be that as it may, he was my cousin, and for his sake I will assail
    ye both; one Cornish knight against ye two."

    When Sir Dodinas le Savage heard this speech, he caught at his spear and
    said, "Sir knight, keep well thyself;" and then they parted and came
    together as it had been thunder, and Sir Dodinas' spear split asunder; but
    Sir Tristram smote him with so full a stroke as hurled him over his
    horse's crupper, and nearly brake his neck. Sir Sagramour, seeing his
    fellow's fall, marvelled who this new knight might be, and dressed his
    spear, and came against Sir Tristram as a whirlwind; but Sir Tristram
    smote him a mighty buffet, and rolled him with his horse down on the
    ground; and in the falling he brake his thigh.

    Then, looking at them both as they lay grovelling on the grass, Sir
    Tristram said, "Fair knights, will ye joust any more? Are there no bigger
    knights in King Arthur's court? Will ye soon again speak shame of Cornish
    knights?"

    "Thou hast defeated us, in truth," replied Sir Sagramour, "and on the
    faith of knighthood I require thee tell us thy right name?"

    "Ye charge me by a great thing," said Sir Tristram, "and I will answer
    ye."

    And when they heard his name the two knights were right glad that they had
    met Sir Tristram, for his deeds were known through all the land, and they
    prayed him to abide in their company.

    "Nay," said he, "I must find a fellow-knight of yours, Sir Bleoberis de
    Ganis, whom I seek."

    "God speed you well," said the two knights; and Sir Tristram rode away.

    Soon he saw before him in a valley Sir Bleoberis with Sir Segwarides' wife
    riding behind his squire upon a palfrey. At that he cried out aloud,
    "Abide, Sir knight of King Arthur's court, bring back again that lady or
    deliver her to me."

    "I will not," said Bleoberis, "for I dread no Cornish knight."

    "Why," said Sir Tristram, "may not a Cornish knight do well as any other?
    This day, but three miles back, two knights of thy own court met me, and
    found one Cornish knight enough for both before we parted."

    "What were their names?" said Sir Bleoberis.

    "Sir Sagramour le Desirous and Sir Dodinas le Savage," said Sir Tristram.

    "Ah," said Sir Bleoberis, amazed; "hast thou then met with them? By my
    faith, they were two good knights and men of worship, and if thou hast
    beat both thou must needs be a good knight; but for all that thou shalt
    beat me also ere thou hast this lady."

    "Defend thee, then," cried out Sir Tristram, and came upon him swiftly
    with his spear in rest. But Sir Bleoberis was as swift as he, and each
    bore down the other, horse and all, on to the earth.

    Then they sprang clear of their horses, and lashed together full eagerly
    and mightily with their swords, tracing and traversing on the right hand
    and on the left more than two hours, and sometimes rushing together with
    such fury that they both lay grovelling on the ground. At last Sir
    Bleoberis started back and said, "Now, gentle knight, hold hard awhile,
    and let us speak together."

    "Say on," said Sir Tristram, "and I will answer thee."

    "Sir," said Sir Bleoberis, "I would know thy name, and court, and
    country."

    "I have no shame to tell them," said Sir Tristram. "I am King Meliodas'
    son, and my mother was sister to King Mark, from whose court I now come.
    My name is Sir Tristram de Lyonesse." "Truly," said Sir Bleoberis, "I am
    right glad to hear it, for thou art he that slew Sir Marhaus hand-to-hand,
    fighting for the Cornish tribute; and overcame Sir Palomedes at the great
    Irish tournament, where also thou didst overthrow Sir Gawain and his nine
    companions."

    "I am that knight," said Sir Tristram, "and now I pray thee tell me thy
    name."

    "I am Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, cousin of Sir Lancelot of the Lake, one of
    the best knights in all the world," he answered.

    "Thou sayest truth," said Sir Tristram; "for Sir Lancelot, as all men
    know, is peerless in courtesy and knighthood, and for the great love I
    bear to his name I will not willingly fight more with thee his kinsman."

    "In good faith, sir," said Sir Bleoberis, "I am as loth to fight thee
    more; but since thou hast followed me to win this lady, I proffer thee
    kindness, courtesy, and gentleness; this lady shall be free to go with
    which of us she pleaseth best."

    "I am content," said Sir Tristram, "for I doubt not she will come to me."

    "That shalt thou shortly prove," said he, and called his squire, and set
    the lady in the midst between them, who forthwith walked to Sir Bleoberis
    and elected to abide with him. Which, when Sir Tristram saw, he was in
    wondrous anger with her, and felt that he could scarce for shame return to
    King Mark's court. But Sir Bleoberis said, "Hearken to me, good knight,
    Sir Tristram, because King Mark gave me free choice of any gift, and
    because this lady chose to go with me, I took her; but now I have
    fulfilled my quest and my adventure, and for thy sake she shall be sent
    back to her husband at the abbey where he lieth."

    So Sir Tristram rode back to Tintagil, and Sir Bleoberis to the abbey
    where Sir Segwarides lay wounded, and there delivered up his lady, and
    departed as a noble knight.

    After this adventure Sir Tristram abode still at his uncle's court, till
    in the envy of his heart King Mark devised a plan to be rid of him. So on
    a certain day he desired him to depart again for Ireland, and there demand
    La Belle Isault on his behalf, to be his queen - for ever had Sir Tristram
    praised her beauty and her goodness, till King Mark desired to wed her for
    himself. Moreover, he believed his nephew surely would be slain by the
    queen's kindred if he once were found again in Ireland.

    But Sir Tristram, scorning fear, made ready to depart, and took with him
    the noblest knights that could be found, arrayed in the richest fashion.

    And when they were come to Ireland, upon a certain day Sir Tristram gave
    his uncle's message, and King Anguish consented thereto.

    But when La Belle Isault was told the tidings she was very sorrowful and
    loth - yet made she ready to set forth with Sir Tristram, and took with her
    Dame Bragwaine, her chief gentlewoman. Then the queen gave Dame Bragwaine,
    and Governale, Sir Tristram's servant, a little flask, and charged them
    that La Belle Isault and King Mark should both drink of it on their
    marriage day, and then should they surely love each other all their lives.

    Anon, Sir Tristram and Isault, with a great company, took the sea and
    departed. And so it chanced that one day sitting in their cabin they were
    athirst, and saw a little flask of gold which seemed to hold good wine. So
    Sir Tristram took it up, and said, "Fair lady, this looketh to be the best
    of wines, and your maid, Dame Bragwaine, and my servant, Governale, have
    kept it for themselves." Thereat they both laughed merrily, and drank each
    after other from the flask, and never before had they tasted any wine
    which seemed so good and sweet. But by the time they had finished drinking
    they loved each other so well that their love nevermore might leave them
    for weal or woe. And thus it came to pass that though Sir Tristram might
    never wed La Belle Isault, he did the mightiest deeds of arms for her sake
    only all his life.

    [Illustration: By the time they had finished drinking they loved each
    other so well that their love never more might leave them.]

    Then they sailed onwards till they came to a castle called Pluere, where
    they would have rested. But anon there ran forth a great company and took
    them prisoners. And when they were in prison, Sir Tristram asked a knight
    and lady whom they found therein wherefore they were so shamefully dealt
    with; "for," said he, "it was never the custom of any place of honour that
    I ever came unto to seize a knight and lady asking shelter and thrust them
    into prison, and a full evil and discourteous custom is it."

    "Sir," said the knight, "know ye not that this is called the Castle
    Pluere, or the weeping castle, and that it is an ancient custom here that
    whatsoever knight abideth in it must needs fight the lord of it, Sir
    Brewnor, and he that is the weakest shall lose his head. And if the lady
    he hath with him be less fair than the lord's wife, she shall lose her
    head; but if she be fairer, then must the lady of the castle lose her
    head."

    "Now Heaven help me," said Sir Tristram, "but this is a foul and shameful
    custom. Yet have I one advantage, for my lady is the fairest that doth
    live in all the world, so that I nothing fear for her; and as for me, I
    will full gladly fight for my own head in a fair field."

    Then said the knight, "Look ye be up betimes to-morrow, and make you ready
    and your lady."

    And on the morrow came Sir Brewnor to Sir Tristram, and put him and Isault
    forth out of prison, and brought him a horse and armour, and bade him make
    ready, for all the commons and estates of that lordship waited in the
    field to see and judge the battle.

    Then Sir Brewnor, holding his lady by the hand, all muffled, came forth,
    and Sir Tristram went to meet him with La Belle Isault beside him, muffled
    also. Then said Sir Brewnor, "Sir knight, if thy lady be fairer than mine,
    with thy sword smite off my lady's head; but if my lady be fairer than
    thine, with my sword I will smite off thy lady's head. And if I overcome
    thee thy lady shall be mine, and thou shalt lose thy head."

    "Sir knight," replied Sir Tristram, "this is a right foul and felon
    custom, and rather than my lady shall lose her head will I lose my own."

    "Nay," said Sir Brewnor, "but the ladies shall be now compared together
    and judgment shall be had."

    "I consent not," cried Sir Tristram, "for who is here that will give
    rightful judgment? Yet doubt not that my lady is far fairer than thine
    own, and that will I prove and make good." Therewith Sir Tristram lifted
    up the veil from off La Belle Isault, and stood beside her with his naked
    sword drawn in his hand.

    Then Sir Brewnor unmuffled his lady and did in like manner. But when he
    saw La Belle Isault he knew that none could be so fair, and all there
    present gave their judgment so. Then said Sir Tristram, "Because thou and
    thy lady have long used this evil custom, and have slain many good knights
    and ladies, it were a just thing to destroy thee both."

    "In good sooth," said Sir Brewnor, "thy lady is fairer than mine, and of
    all women I never saw any so fair. Therefore, slay my lady if thou wilt,
    and I doubt not but I shall slay thee and have thine."

    "Thou shalt win her," said Sir Tristram, "as dearly as ever knight won
    lady; and because of thy own judgment and of the evil custom that thy lady
    hath consented to, I will slay her as thou sayest."

    And therewithal Sir Tristram went to him and took his lady from him, and
    smote off her head at a stroke.

    "Now take thy horse," cried out Sir Brewnor, "for since I have lost my
    lady I will win thine and have thy life."

    So they took their horses and came together as fast as they could fly, and
    Sir Tristram lightly smote Sir Brewnor from his horse. But he rose right
    quickly, and when Sir Tristram came again he thrust his horse through both
    the shoulders, so that it reeled and fell. But Sir Tristram was light and
    nimble, and voided his horse, and rose up and dressed his shield before
    him, though meanwhile, ere he could draw out his sword, Sir Brewnor gave
    him three or four grievous strokes. Then they rushed furiously together
    like two wild boars, and fought hurtling and hewing here and there for
    nigh two hours, and wounded each other full sorely. Then at the last Sir
    Brewnor rushed upon Sir Tristram and took him in his arms to throw him,
    for he trusted greatly in his strength. But Sir Tristram was at that time
    called the strongest and biggest knight of the world; for he was bigger
    than Sir Lancelot, though Sir Lancelot was better breathed. So anon he
    thrust Sir Brewnor grovelling to the earth, and then unlaced his helm and
    struck off his head. Then all they that belonged to the castle came and
    did him homage and fealty, and prayed him to abide there for a season and
    put an end to that foul custom.

    But within a while he departed and came to Cornwall, and there King Mark
    was forthwith wedded to La Belle Isault with great joy and splendour.

    And Sir Tristram had high honour, and ever lodged at the king's court. But
    for all he had done him such services King Mark hated him, and on a
    certain day he set two knights to fall upon him as he rode in the forest.
    But Sir Tristram lightly smote one's head off, and sorely wounded the
    other, and made him bear his fellow's body to the king. At that the king
    dissembled and hid from Sir Tristram that the knights were sent by him;
    yet more than ever he hated him in secret, and sought to slay him.

    So on a certain day, by the assent of Sir Andret, a false knight, and
    forty other knights, Sir Tristram was taken prisoner in his sleep and
    carried to a chapel on the rocks above the sea to be cast down. But as
    they were about to cast him in, suddenly he brake his bonds asunder, and
    rushing at Sir Andret, took his sword and smote him down therewith. Then,
    leaping down the rocks where none could follow, he escaped them. But one
    shot after him and wounded him full sorely with a poisoned arrow in the
    arm.

    Anon, his servant Governale, with Sir Lambegus sought him and found him
    safe among the rocks, and told him that King Mark had banished him and all
    his followers to avenge Sir Andret's death. So they took ship and came to
    Brittany.

    Now Sir Tristram, suffering great anguish from his wound, was told to seek
    Isoude, the daughter of the King of Brittany, for she alone could cure
    such wounds. Wherefore he went to King Howell's court, and said, "Lord, I
    am come into this country to have help from thy daughter, for men tell me
    none but she may help me." And Isoude gladly offering to do her best,
    within a month he was made whole.

    While he abode still at that court, an earl named Grip made war upon King
    Howell, and besieged him; and Sir Kay Hedius, the king's son, went forth
    against him, but was beaten in battle and sore wounded. Then the king
    praying Sir Tristram for his help, he took with him such knights as he
    could find, and on the morrow, in another battle, did such deeds of arms
    that all the land spake of him. For there he slew the earl with his own
    hands, and more than a hundred knights besides.

    When he came back King Howell met him, and saluted him with every honour
    and rejoicing that could be thought of, and took him in his arms, and
    said, "Sir Tristram, all my kingdom will I resign to thee."

    "Nay," answered he, "God forbid, for truly am I beholden to you for ever
    for your daughter's sake."

    Then the king prayed him to take Isoude in marriage, with a great dower of
    lands and castles. To this Sir Tristram presently consenting anon they
    were wedded at the court.

    But within a while Sir Tristram greatly longed to see Cornwall, and Sir
    Kay Hedius desired to go with him. So they took ship; but as soon as they
    were at sea the wind blew them upon the coast of North Wales, nigh to
    Castle Perilous, hard by a forest wherein were many strange adventures
    ofttimes to be met. Then said Sir Tristram to Sir Kay Hedius, "Let us
    prove some of them ere we depart." So they took their horses and rode
    forth.

    When they had ridden a mile or more, Sir Tristram spied a goodly knight
    before him well armed, who sat by a clear fountain with a strong horse
    near him, tied to an oak-tree. "Fair sir," said he, when they came near,
    "ye seem to be a knight errant by your arms and harness, therefore make
    ready now to joust with one of us, or both."

    Thereat the knight spake not, but took his shield and buckled it round his
    neck, and leaping on his horse caught a spear from his squire's hand.

    Then said Sir Kay Hedius to Sir Tristram, "Let me assay him."

    "Do thy best," said he.

    So the two knights met, and Sir Kay Hedius fell sorely wounded in the
    breast.

    "Thou hast well jousted," cried Sir Tristram to the knight; "now make
    ready for me!"

    "I am ready," answered he, and encountered him, and smote him so heavily
    that he fell down from his horse. Whereat, being ashamed, he put his
    shield before him, and drew his sword, crying to the strange knight to do
    likewise. Then they fought on foot for well nigh two hours, till they were
    both weary.

    At last Sir Tristram said, "In all my life I never met a knight so strong
    and well-breathed as ye be. It were a pity we should further hurt each
    other. Hold thy hand, fair knight, and tell me thy name."

    "That will I," answered he, "if thou wilt tell me thine."

    "My name," said he, "is Sir Tristram of Lyonesse."

    "And mine, Sir Lamoracke of Gaul."

    Then both cried out together, "Well met;" and Sir Lamoracke said, "Sir,
    for your great renown, I will that ye have all the worship of this battle,
    and therefore will I yield me unto you." And therewith he took his sword
    by the point to yield him.

    "Nay," said Sir Tristram, "ye shall not do so, for well I know ye do it of
    courtesy, and not of dread." And therewith he offered his sword to Sir
    Lamoracke, saying, "Sir, as an overcome knight, I yield me unto you as
    unto the man of noblest powers I have ever met with."

    "Hold," said Sir Lamoracke, "let us now swear together nevermore to fight
    against each other."

    Then did they swear as he said.

    Then Sir Tristram returned to Sir Kay Hedius, and when he was whole of his
    wounds, they departed together in a ship, and landed on the coast of
    Cornwall. And when they came ashore, Sir Tristram eagerly sought news of
    La Belle Isault. And one told him in mistake that she was dead. Whereat,
    for sore and grievous sorrow, he fell down in a swoon, and so lay for
    three days and nights.

    When he awoke therefrom he was crazed, and ran into the forest and abode
    there like a wild man many days; whereby he waxed lean and weak of body,
    and would have died, but that a hermit laid some meat beside him as he
    slept. Now in that forest was a giant named Tauleas, who, for fear of
    Tristram, had hid himself within a castle, but when they told him he was
    mad, came forth and went at large again. And on a certain day he saw a
    knight of Cornwall, named Sir Dinaunt, pass by with a lady, and when he
    had alighted by a well to rest, the giant leaped out from his ambush, and
    took him by the throat to slay him. But Sir Tristram, as he wandered
    through the forest, came upon them as they struggled; and when the knight
    cried out for help, he rushed upon the giant, and taking up Sir Dinaunt's
    sword, struck off therewith the giant's head, and straightway disappeared
    among the trees.

    Anon, Sir Dinaunt took the head of Tauleas, and bare it with him to the
    court of King Mark, whither he was bound, and told of his adventures.
    "Where had ye this adventure?" said King Mark.

    "At a fair fountain in thy forest," answered he.

    "I would fain see that wild man," said the king.

    So within a day or two he commanded his knights to a great hunting in the
    forest. And when the king came to the well, he saw a wild man lying there
    asleep, having a sword beside him; but he knew not that it was Sir
    Tristram. Then he blew his horn, and summoned all his knights to take him
    gently up and bear him to the court.

    And when they came thereto they bathed and washed him, and brought him
    somewhat to his right mind. Now La Belle Isault knew not that Sir Tristram
    was in Cornwall; but when she heard that a wild man had been found in the
    forest, she came to see him. And so sorely was he changed, she knew him
    not. "Yet," said she to Dame Bragwaine, "in good faith I seem to have
    beheld him ofttimes before."

    As she thus spoke a little hound, which Sir Tristram had given her when
    she first came to Cornwall, and which was ever with her, saw Sir Tristram
    lying there, and leapt upon him, licking his hands and face, and whined
    and barked for joy.

    "Alas," cried out La Belle Isault, "it is my own true knight, Sir
    Tristram."

    And at her voice Sir Tristram's senses wholly came again, and wellnigh he
    wept for joy to see his lady living.

    But never would the hound depart from Tristram; and when King Mark and
    other knights came up to see him, it sat upon his body and bayed at all
    who came too near. Then one of the knights said, "Surely this is Sir
    Tristram; I see it by the hound."

    "Nay," said the king, "it cannot be," and asked Sir Tristram on his faith
    who he was.

    "My name," said he, "is Sir Tristram of Lyonesse, and now ye may do what
    ye list with me."

    Then the king said, "It repents me that ye are recovered," and sought to
    make his barons slay him. But most of them would not assent thereto, and
    counselled him instead to banish Tristram for ten years again from
    Cornwall, for returning without orders from the king. So he was sworn to
    depart forthwith.

    And as he went towards the ship a knight of King Arthur, named Sir
    Dinadan, who sought him, came and said, "Fair knight, ere that you pass
    out of this country, I pray you joust with me!"

    "With a good will," said he.

    Then they ran together, and Sir Tristram lightly smote him from his horse.
    Anon he prayed Sir Tristram's leave to bear him company, and when he had
    consented they rode together to the ship.

    Then was Sir Tristram full of bitterness of heart, and said to all the
    knights who took him to the shore, "Greet well King Mark and all mine
    enemies from me, and tell them I will come again when I may. Well am I now
    rewarded for slaying Sir Marhaus, and delivering this kingdom from its
    bondage, and for the perils wherewithal I brought La Belle Isault from
    Ireland to the king, and rescued her at the Castle Pluere, and for the
    slaying of the giant Tauleas, and all the other deeds that I have done for
    Cornwall and King Mark." Thus angrily and passing bitterly he spake, and
    went his way.

    And after sailing awhile the ship stayed at a landing-place upon the coast
    of Wales; and there Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan alighted, and on the
    shore they met two knights, Sir Ector and Sir Bors. And Sir Ector
    encountered with Sir Dinadan and smote him to the ground; but Sir Bors
    would not encounter with Sir Tristram, "For," said he, "no Cornish knights
    are men of worship." Thereat Sir Tristram was full wroth, but presently
    there met them two more knights, Sir Bleoberis and Sir Driant; and Sir
    Bleoberis proffered to joust with Sir Tristram, who shortly smote him
    down.

    "I had not thought," cried out Sir Bors, "that any Cornish knight could do
    so valiantly."

    Then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan departed, and rode into a forest, and as
    they rode a damsel met them, who for Sir Lancelot's sake was seeking any
    noble knights to rescue him. For Queen Morgan le Fay, who hated him, had
    ordered thirty men-at-arms to lie in ambush for him as he passed, with the
    intent to kill him. So the damsel prayed them to rescue him.

    Then said Sir Tristram, "Bring me to that place, fair damsel."

    But Sir Dinadan cried out, "It is not possible for us to meet with thirty
    knights! I will take no part in such a hardihood, for to match one or two
    or three knights is enough; but to match fifteen I will never assay."

    "For shame," replied Sir Tristram, "do but your part."

    "That will I not," said he; "wherefore, I pray ye, lend me your shield,
    for it is of Cornwall, and because men of that country are deemed cowards,
    ye are but little troubled as ye ride with knights to joust with."

    "Nay," said Sir Tristram, "I will never give my shield up for her sake who
    gave it me; but if thou wilt not stand by me to-day I will surely slay
    thee; for I ask no more of thee than to fight one knight, and if thy heart
    will not serve thee that much, thou shalt stand by and look on me and
    them."

    "Would God that I had never met with ye!" cried Sir Dinadan; "but I
    promise to look on and do all that I may to save myself."

    Anon they came to where the thirty knights lay waiting, and Sir Tristram
    rushed upon them, saying, "Here is one who fights for love of Lancelot!"
    Then slew he two of them at the first onset with his spear, and ten more
    swiftly after with his sword. At that Sir Dinadan took courage, and
    assailed the others with him, till they turned and fled.

    But Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode on till nightfall, and meeting with
    a shepherd, asked him if he knew of any lodging thereabouts.

    "Truly, fair lords," said he, "there is good lodging in a castle hard by,
    but it is a custom there that none shall lodge therein save ye first joust
    with two knights, and as soon as ye be within, ye shall find your match."

    "That is an evil lodging," said Sir Dinadan; "lodge where ye will, I will
    not lodge there."

    "Shame on thee!" said Sir Tristram; "art thou a knight at all?"

    Then he required him on his knighthood to go with him, and they rode
    together to the castle. As soon as they were near, two knights came out
    and ran full speed against them; but both of them they overthrew, and went
    within the castle, and had noble cheer. Now, when they were unarmed and
    ready to take rest, there came to the castle-gate two knights, Sir
    Palomedes and Sir Gaheris, and desired the custom of the castle.

    "I would far rather rest than fight," said Sir Dinadan.

    "That may not be," replied Sir Tristram, "for we must needs defend the
    custom of the castle, seeing we have overcome its lords; therefore, make
    ready."

    "Alas that I ever came into your company," said Sir Dinadan.

    So they made ready, and Sir Gaheris encountered Sir Tristram and fell
    before him; but Sir Palomedes overthrew Sir Dinadan. Then would all fight
    on foot save Sir Dinadan, for he was sorely bruised and frighted by his
    fall. And when Sir Tristram prayed him to fight, "I will not," answered
    he, "for I was wounded by those thirty knights with whom we fought this
    morning; and as to you, ye are in truth like one gone mad, and who would
    cast himself away! There be but two knights in the world so mad, and the
    other is Sir Lancelot, with whom I once rode forth, who kept me evermore
    at battling so that for a quarter of a year thereafter I lay in my bed.
    Heaven defend me again from either of your fellowships!"

    "Well," said Sir Tristram, "if it must be, I will fight them both."

    Therewith he drew his sword and assailed Sir Palomedes and Sir Gaheris
    together; but Sir Palomedes said, "Nay, but it is a shame for two to fight
    with one." So he bade Sir Gaheris stand by, and he and Sir Tristram fought
    long together; but in the end Sir Tristram drave him backward, whereat Sir
    Gaheris and Sir Dinadan with one accord sundered them. Then Sir Tristram
    prayed the two knights to lodge there; but Sir Dinadan departed and rode
    away into a priory hard by, and there he lodged that night.

    And on the morrow came Sir Tristram to the priory to find him, and seeing
    him so weary that he could not ride, he left him, and departed. At that
    same priory was lodged Sir Pellinore, who asked Sir Dinadan Sir Tristram's
    name, but could not learn it, for Sir Tristram had charged that he should
    remain unknown. Then said Sir Pellinore, "Since ye will not tell it me, I
    will ride after him and find it myself."

    "Beware, Sir knight," said Sir Dinadan, "ye will repent it if ye follow
    him."

    But Sir Pellinore straightway mounted and overtook him, and cried to him
    to joust; whereat Sir Tristram forthwith turned and smote him down, and
    wounded him full sorely in the shoulder.

    On the day after, Sir Tristram met a herald, who told him of a tournament
    proclaimed between King Carados of Scotland, and the King of North Wales,
    to be held at the Maiden's Castle. Now King Carados sought Sir Lancelot to
    fight there on his side, and the King of North Wales sought Sir Tristram.
    And Sir Tristram purposed to be there. So as he rode, he met Sir Key, the
    seneschal, and Sir Sagramour, and Sir Key proffered to joust with him. But
    he refused, desiring to keep himself unwearied for the tourney. Then Sir
    Key cried, "Sir knight of Cornwall, joust with me, or yield as recreant."
    When Sir Tristram heard that, he fiercely turned and set his spear in
    rest, and spurred his horse towards him. But when Sir Key saw him so madly
    coming on, he in his turn refused, whereat Sir Tristram called him coward,
    till for shame he was compelled to meet him. Then Sir Tristram lightly
    smote him down, and rode away. But Sir Sagramour pursued him, crying
    loudly to joust with him also. So Sir Tristram turned and quickly
    overthrew him likewise, and departed.

    Anon a damsel met him as he rode, and told him of a knight adventurous who
    did great harm thereby, and prayed him for his help. But as he went with
    her he met Sir Gawain, who knew the damsel for a maiden of Queen Morgan le
    Fay. Knowing, therefore, that she needs must have evil plots against Sir
    Tristram, Sir Gawain demanded of him courteously whither he went.

    "I know not whither," said he, "save as this damsel leadeth me."

    "Sir," said Sir Gawain, "ye shall not ride with her, for she and her lady
    never yet did good to any;" and, drawing his sword, he said to the
    damsel, "Tell me now straightway for what cause thou leadest this knight
    or else shalt thou die; for I know of old thy lady's treason."

    "Mercy, Sir Gawain," cried the damsel, "and I will tell thee all." Then
    she told him that Queen Morgan had ordained thirty fair damsels to seek
    out Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram, and by their wiles persuade them to her
    castle, where she had thirty knights in wait to slay them.

    "Oh shame!" cried Sir Gawain, "that ever such foul treason should be
    wrought by a queen, and a king's sister." Then said he to Sir Tristram,
    "Sir knight, if ye will stand with me, we will together prove the malice
    of these thirty knights."

    "I will not fail you," answered he, "for but few days since I had to do
    with thirty knights of that same queen, and trust we may win honour as
    lightly now as then."

    So they rode together, and when they came to the castle, Sir Gawain cried
    aloud, "Queen Morgan le Fay, send out thy knights that we may fight with
    them."

    Then the queen urged her knights to issue forth, but they durst not, for
    they well knew Sir Tristram, and feared him greatly.

    So Sir Tristram and Sir Gawain went on their way, and as they rode they
    saw a knight, named Sir Brewse-without-pity, chasing a lady, with intent
    to slay her. Then Sir Gawain prayed Sir Tristram to hold still and let him
    assail that knight. So he rode up between Sir Brewse and the lady, and
    cried, "False knight, turn thee to me and leave that lady." Then Sir
    Brewse turned and set his spear in rest, and rushed against Sir Gawain
    and overthrew him, and rode his horse upon him as he lay, which when Sir
    Tristram saw, he cried, "Forbear that villainy," and galloped at him. But
    when Sir Brewse saw by the shield it was Sir Tristram, he turned and fled.
    And though Sir Tristram followed swiftly after him, yet he was so well
    horsed that he escaped.

    Anon Sir Tristram and Sir Gawain came nigh the Maiden's Castle, and there
    an old knight named Sir Pellonnes gave them lodging. And Sir Persides, the
    son of Sir Pellonnes, a good knight, came out to welcome them. And, as
    they stood talking at a bay window of the castle, they saw a goodly knight
    ride by on a black horse, and carrying a black shield. "What knight is
    that?" asked Tristram.

    "One of the best knights in all the world," said Sir Persides.

    "Is he Sir Lancelot?" said Sir Tristram.

    "Nay," answered Sir Persides, "it is Sir Palomedes, who is yet
    unchristened."

    Within a while one came and told them that a knight with a black shield
    had smitten down thirteen knights. "Let us go and see this jousting," said
    Sir Tristram. So they armed themselves and went down. And when Sir
    Palomedes saw Sir Persides, he sent a squire to him and proffered him to
    joust. So they jousted, and Sir Persides was overthrown. Then Sir Tristram
    made ready to joust, but ere he had his spear in rest, Sir Palomedes took
    him at advantage, and struck him on the shield so that he fell. At that
    Sir Tristram was wroth out of measure and sore ashamed, wherefore he sent
    a squire and prayed Sir Palomedes to joust once again. But he would not,
    saying, "Tell thy master to revenge himself to-morrow at the Maiden's
    Castle, where he shall see me again."

    So on the morrow Sir Tristram commanded his servant to give him a black
    shield with no cognizance thereon, and he and Sir Persides rode into the
    tournament and joined King Carados' side.

    Then the knights of the King of North Wales came forth, and there was a
    great fighting and breaking of spears, and overthrow of men and horses.

    Now King Arthur sat above in a high gallery to see the tourney and give
    the judgment, and Sir Lancelot sat beside him. Then came against Sir
    Tristram and Sir Persides, two knights with them of North Wales, Sir
    Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris; and Sir Persides was smitten down and nigh
    slain, for four horsemen rode over him. But Sir Tristram rode against Sir
    Gaheris and smote him from his horse, and when Sir Bleoberis next
    encountered him, he overthrew him also. Anon they horsed themselves again,
    and with them came Sir Dinadan, whom Sir Tristram forthwith smote so
    sorely, that he reeled off his saddle. Then cried he, "Ah! Sir knight, I
    know ye better than ye deem, and promise nevermore to come against ye."
    Then rode Sir Bleoberis at him the second time, and had a buffet that
    felled him to the earth. And soon thereafter the king commanded to cease
    for that day, and all men marvelled who Sir Tristram was, for the prize of
    the first day was given him in the name of the Knight of the Black Shield.

    Now Sir Palomedes was on the side of the King of North Wales, but knew not
    Sir Tristram again. And, when he saw his marvellous deeds, he sent to ask
    his name. "As to that," said Sir Tristram, "he shall not know at this
    time, but tell him he shall know when I have broken two spears upon him,
    for I am the knight he smote down yesterday, and whatever side he taketh,
    I will take the other."

    So when they told him that Sir Palomedes would be on King Carados'
    side - for he was kindred to King Arthur - "Then will I be on the King of
    North Wales' side," said he, "but else would I be on my lord King
    Arthur's."

    Then on the morrow, when King Arthur was come, the heralds blew unto the
    tourney. And King Carados jousted with the King of a Hundred Knights and
    fell before him, and then came in King Arthur's knights and bare back
    those of North Wales. But anon Sir Tristram came to aid them and bare back
    the battle, and fought so mightily that none could stand against him, for
    he smote down on the right and on the left, so that all the knights and
    common people shouted his praise.

    "Since I bare arms," said King Arthur, "never saw I a knight do more
    marvellous deeds."

    Then the King of the Hundred Knights and those of North Wales, set upon
    twenty knights who were of Sir Lancelot's kin, who fought all together,
    none failing the others. When Sir Tristram beheld their nobleness and
    valour, he marvelled much. "Well may he be valiant and full of prowess,"
    said he, "who hath such noble knights for kindred." So, when he had looked
    on them awhile, he thought it shame to see two hundred men assailing
    twenty, and riding to the King of a Hundred Knights, he said, "I pray
    thee, Sir king, leave your fighting with those twenty knights, for ye be
    too many and they be too few. For ye shall gain no honour if ye win, and
    that I see verily ye will not do unless ye slay them; but if ye will not
    stay, I will ride with them and help them."

    "Nay," said the king, "ye shall not do so; for full gladly I will do you
    courtesy," and with that he withdrew his knights.

    Then Sir Tristram rode his way into the forest, that no man might know
    him. And King Arthur caused the heralds to blow that the tourney should
    end that day, and he gave the King of North Wales the prize, because Sir
    Tristram was on his side. And in all the field there was such a cry that
    the sound thereof was heard two miles away - "The knight with the black
    shield hath won the field."

    "Alas!" said King Arthur, "where is that knight? it is shame to let him
    thus escape us." Then he comforted his knights, and said, "Be not
    dismayed, my friends, howbeit ye have lost the day; be of good cheer;
    to-morrow I myself will be in the field, and fare with you." So they all
    rested that night.

    And on the morrow the heralds blew unto the field. So the King of North
    Wales and the King of a Hundred Knights encountered with King Carados and
    the King of Ireland, and overthrew them. With that came King Arthur, and
    did mighty deeds of arms, and overthrew the King of North Wales and his
    fellows, and put twenty valiant knights to the worse. Anon came in Sir
    Palomedes, and made great fight upon King Arthur's side. But Sir Tristram
    rode furiously against him, and Sir Palomedes was thrown from his horse.
    Then cried King Arthur, "Knight of the Black Shield, keep thyself." And as
    he spake he came upon him, and smote him from his saddle to the ground,
    and so passed on to other knights. Then Sir Palomedes having now another
    horse rushed at Sir Tristram, as he was on foot, thinking to run over him.
    But he was aware of him, and stepped aside, and grasped Sir Palomedes by
    the arms, and pulled him off his horse. Then they rushed together with
    their swords, and many stood still to gaze on them. And Sir Tristram smote
    Sir Palomedes with three mighty strokes upon the helm, crying at each
    stroke, "Take this for Sir Tristram's sake," and with that Sir Palomedes
    fell to the earth.

    Anon the King of North Wales brought Sir Tristram another horse, and Sir
    Palomedes found one also. Then did they joust again with passing rage, for
    both by now were like mad lions. But Sir Tristram avoided his spear, and
    seized Sir Palomedes by the neck, and pulled him from his saddle, and bore
    him onward ten spears' length, and so let him fall. Then King Arthur drew
    forth his sword and smote the spear asunder, and gave Sir Tristram two or
    three sore strokes ere he could get at his own sword. But when he had it
    in his hand he mightily assailed the king. With that eleven knights of
    Lancelot's kin went forth against him, but he smote them all down to the
    earth, so that men marvelled at his deeds.

    And the cry was now so great that Sir Lancelot got a spear in his hand,
    and came down to assay Sir Tristram, saying, "Knight with the black
    shield, make ready." When Sir Tristram heard him he levelled his spear,
    and both stooping their heads, they ran together mightily, as it had been
    thunder. And Sir Tristram's spear brake short, but Sir Lancelot struck him
    with a deep wound in the side and broke his spear, yet overthrew him not.
    Therewith Sir Tristram, smarting at his wound, drew forth his sword, and
    rushing at Sir Lancelot, gave him mighty strokes upon the helm, so that
    the sparks flew from it, and Sir Lancelot stooped his head down to the
    saddle-bow. But then Sir Tristram turned and left the field, for he felt
    his wound so grievous that he deemed he should soon die. Then did Sir
    Lancelot hold the field against all comers, and put the King of North
    Wales and his party to the worse. And because he was the last knight in
    the field the prize was given him.

    But he refused to take it, and when the cry was raised, "Sir Lancelot hath
    won the day," he cried out, "Nay, but Sir Tristram is the victor, for he
    first began and last endured, and so hath he done each day." And all men
    honoured Lancelot more for his knightly words than if he had taken the
    prize.

    Thus was the tournament ended, and King Arthur departed to Caerleon, for
    the Whitsun feast was now nigh come, and all the knights adventurous went
    their ways. And many sought Sir Tristram in the forest whither he had
    gone, and at last Sir Lancelot found him, and brought him to King Arthur's
    court, as hath been told already.




    CHAPTER XII

    _The Quest of the Sangreal, and the Adventures of Sir Percival, Sir Bors,
    and Sir Galahad_


    After these things, Merlin fell into a dotage of love for a damsel of the
    Lady of the Lake, and would let her have no rest, but followed her in
    every place. And ever she encouraged him, and made him welcome till she
    had learned all his crafts that she desired to know.

    Then upon a time she went with him beyond the sea to the land of Benwicke,
    and as they went he showed her many wonders, till at length she was
    afraid, and would fain have been delivered from him.

    And as they were in the forest of Broceliande, they sat together under an
    oak-tree, and the damsel prayed to see all that charm whereby men might be
    shut up yet alive in rocks or trees. But he refused her a long time,
    fearing to let her know, yet in the end, her prayers and kisses overcame
    him, and he told her all. Then did she make him great cheer, but anon, as
    he lay down to sleep, she softly rose, and walked about him waving her
    hands and muttering the charm, and presently enclosed him fast within the
    tree whereby he slept. And therefrom nevermore he could by any means come
    out for all the crafts that he could do. And so she departed and left
    Merlin.

    [Illustration: Waving her hands and muttering the charm, and presently
    enclosed him fast within the tree.]

    At the vigil of the next Feast of Pentecost, when all the Knights of the
    Round Table were met together at Camelot, and had heard mass, and were
    about to sit down to meat, there rode into the hall a fair lady on
    horseback, who went straight up to King Arthur where he sat upon his
    throne, and reverently saluted him.

    "God be with thee, fair damsel," quoth the king; "what desirest thou of
    me?"

    "I pray thee tell me, lord," she answered, "where Sir Lancelot is."

    "Yonder may ye see him," said King Arthur.

    Then went she to Sir Lancelot and said, "Sir, I salute thee in King
    Pelles' name, and require thee to come with me into the forest hereby."

    Then asked he her with whom she dwelt, and what she wished of him.

    "I dwell with King Pelles," said she, "whom Balin erst so sorely wounded
    when he smote the dolorous stroke. It is he who hath sent me to call
    thee."

    "I will go with thee gladly," said Sir Lancelot, and bade his squire
    straightway saddle his horse and bring his armour.

    Then came the queen to him and said, "Sir Lancelot, will ye leave me thus
    at this high feast?"

    "Madam," replied the damsel, "by dinner-time to-morrow he shall be with
    you."

    "If I thought not," said the queen, "he should not go with thee by my
    goodwill."

    Then Sir Lancelot and the lady rode forth till they came to the forest,
    and in a valley thereof found an abbey of nuns, whereby a squire stood
    ready to open the gates. When they had entered, and descended from their
    horses, a joyful crowd pressed round Sir Lancelot and heartily saluted
    him, and led him to the abbess's chamber, and unarmed him. Anon he saw his
    cousins likewise there, Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, who also made great joy
    at seeing him, and said, "By what adventure art thou here, for we thought
    to have seen thee at Camelot to-morrow?"

    "A damsel brought me here," said he, "but as yet I know not for what
    service."

    As they thus talked twelve nuns came in, who brought with them a youth so
    passing fair and well made, that in all the world his match could not be
    found. His name was Galahad, and though he knew him not, nor Lancelot him,
    Sir Lancelot was his father.

    "Sir," said the nuns, "we bring thee here this child whom we have
    nourished from his youth, and pray thee to make him a knight, for from no
    worthier hand can he receive that order."

    Then Sir Lancelot, looking on the youth, saw that he was seemly and demure
    as a dove, with every feature good and noble, and thought he never had
    beheld a better fashioned man of his years. "Cometh this desire from
    himself?" said he.

    "Yea," answered Galahad and all the nuns.

    "To-morrow, then, in reverence for the feast, he shall have his wish,"
    said Sir Lancelot.

    And the next day at the hour of prime, he knighted him, and said, "God
    make of thee as good a man as He hath made thee beautiful."

    Then with Sir Lionel and Sir Bors he returned to the court, and found all
    gone to the minster to hear service. When they came into the banquet-hall
    each knight and baron found his name written in some seat in letters of
    gold, as "here ought to sit Sir Lionel," "here ought to sit Sir
    Gawain," - and so forth. And in the Perilous Seat, at the high centre of
    the table, a name was also written, whereat they marvelled greatly, for no
    living man had ever yet dared sit upon that seat, save one, and him a
    flame leaped forth and drew down under earth, so that he was no more seen.

    Then came Sir Lancelot and read the letters in that seat, and said, "My
    counsel is that this inscription be now covered up until the knight be
    come who shall achieve this great adventure." So they made a veil of silk
    and put it over the letters.

    In the meanwhile came Sir Gawain to the court and told the king he had a
    message to him from beyond the sea, from Merlin.

    "For," said he, "as I rode through the forest of Broceliande but five days
    since, I heard the voice of Merlin speaking to me from the midst of an
    oak-tree, whereat, in great amazement, I besought him to come forth. But
    he, with many groans, replied he never more might do so, for that none
    could free him, save the damsel of the Lake, who had enclosed him there by
    his own spells which he had taught her. 'But go,' said he, 'to King
    Arthur, and tell him, that he now prepare his knights and all his Table
    Round to seek the Sangreal, for the time is come when it shall be
    achieved.'"

    When Sir Gawain had spoken thus, King Arthur sat pensive in spirit, and
    mused deeply of the Holy Grale an what saintly knight should come who
    might achieve it.

    Anon he bade them hasten to set on the banquet. "Sir," said Sir Key, the
    seneschal, "if ye go now to meat ye will break the ancient custom of your
    court, for never have ye dined at this high feast till ye have seen some
    strange adventure."

    "Thou sayest truly," said the king, "but my mind was full of wonders and
    musings, till I bethought me not of mine old custom."

    As they stood speaking thus, a squire ran in and cried, "Lord, I bring
    thee marvellous tidings."

    "What be they?" said King Arthur.

    "Lord," said he, "hereby at the river is a marvellous great stone, which I
    myself saw swim down hitherwards upon the water, and in it there is set a
    sword, and ever the stone heaveth and swayeth on the water, but floateth
    down no further with the stream."

    "I will go and see it," said the king. So all the knights went with him,
    and when they came to the river, there surely found they a mighty stone of
    red marble floating on the water, as the squire had said, and therein
    stuck a fair and rich sword, on the pommel whereof were precious stones
    wrought skilfully with gold into these words: "No man shall take me hence
    but he by whose side I should hang, and he shall be the best knight in the
    world."

    When the king read this, he turned round to Sir Lancelot, and said, "Fair
    sir, this sword ought surely to be thine, for thou art the best knight in
    all the world."

    But Lancelot answered soberly, "Certainly, sir, it is not for me; nor will
    I have the hardihood to set my hand upon it. For he that toucheth it and
    faileth to achieve it shall one day be wounded by it mortally. But I doubt
    not, lord, this day will show the greatest marvels that we yet have seen,
    for now the time is fully come, as Merlin hath forewarned us, when all the
    prophecies about the Sangreal shall be fulfilled."

    Then stepped Sir Gawain forward and pulled at the sword, but could not
    move it, and after him Sir Percival, to keep him fellowship in any peril
    he might suffer. But no other knight durst be so hardy as to try.

    "Now may ye go to your dinner," said Sir Key, "for a marvellous adventure
    ye have had."

    So all returned from the river, and every knight sat down in his own
    place, and the high feast and banquet then was sumptuously begun, and all
    the hall was full of laughter and loud talk and jests, and running to and
    fro of squires who served their knights, and noise of jollity and mirth.

    Then suddenly befell a wondrous thing, for all the doors and windows of
    the hall shut violently of themselves, and made thick darkness; and
    presently there came a fair and gentle light from out the Perilous Seat,
    and filled the palace with its beams. Then a dead silence fell on all the
    knights, and each man anxiously beheld his neighbour.

    But King Arthur rose and said, "Lords and fair knights, have ye no fear,
    but rejoice; we have seen strange things to-day, but stranger yet remain.
    For now I know we shall to-day see him who may sit in the Siege Perilous,
    and shall achieve the Sangreal. For as ye all well know, that holy vessel,
    wherefrom at the Supper of our Lord before His death He drank the wine
    with His disciples, hath been held ever since the holiest treasure of the
    world, and wheresoever it hath rested peace and prosperity have rested
    with it on the land. But since the dolorous stroke which Balin gave King
    Pelles none have seen it, for Heaven, wroth with that presumptuous blow,
    hath hid it none know where. Yet somewhere in the world it still may be,
    and may be it is left to us, and to this noble order of the Table Round,
    to find and bring it home, and make of this our realm the happiest in the
    earth. Many great quests and perilous adventures have ye all taken and
    achieved, but this high quest he only shall attain who hath clean hands
    and a pure heart, and valour and hardihood beyond all othermen."

    While the king spoke there came in softly an old man robed all in white,
    leading with him a young knight clad in red from top to toe, but without
    armour or shield, and having by his side an empty scabbard.

    The old man went up to the king, and said, "Lord, here I bring thee this
    young knight of royal lineage, and of the blood of Joseph of Arimathea, by
    whom the marvels of thy court shall fully be accomplished."

    The king was right glad at his words, and said, "Sir, ye be right heartily
    welcome, and the young knight also."

    Then the old man put on Sir Galahad (for it was he) a crimson robe trimmed
    with fine ermine, and took him by the hand and led him to the Perilous
    Seat, and lifting up the silken cloth which hung upon it, read these words
    written in gold letters, "This is the seat of Sir Galahad, the good
    knight."

    "Sir," said the old man, "this place is thine."

    Then sat Sir Galahad down firmly and surely, and said to the old man,
    "Sir, ye may now go your way, for ye have done well and truly all ye were
    commanded, and commend me to my grandsire, King Pelles, and say that I
    shall see him soon." So the old man departed with a retinue of twenty
    noble squires.

    But all the knights of the Round Table marvelled at Sir Galahad, and at
    his tender age, and at his sitting there so surely in the Perilous Seat.

    Then the king led Sir Galahad forth from the palace, to show him the
    adventure of the floating stone. "Here" said he, "is as great a marvel as
    I ever saw, and right good knights have tried and failed to gain that
    sword."

    "I marvel not thereat," said Galahad, "for this adventure is not theirs,
    but mine; and for the certainty I had thereof, I brought no sword with me,
    as thou mayst see here by this empty scabbard."

    Anon he laid his hand upon the sword, and lightly drew it from the stone,
    and put it in his sheath, and said, "This sword was that enchanted one
    which erst belonged to the good knight, Sir Balin, wherewith he slew
    through piteous mistake his brother Balan; who also slew him at the same
    time: all which great woe befell him through the dolorous stroke he gave
    my grandsire, King Pelles, the wound whereof is not yet whole, nor shall
    be till I heal him."

    As he stood speaking thus, they saw a lady riding swiftly down the river's
    bank towards them, on a white palfrey; who, saluting the king and queen,
    said, "Lord king, Nacien the hermit sendeth thee word that to thee shall
    come to-day the greatest honour and worship that hath yet ever befallen a
    king of Britain; for this day shall the Sangreal appear in thy house."

    With that the damsel took her leave, and departed the same way she came.

    "Now," said the king, "I know that from to-day the quest of the Sangreal
    shall begin, and all ye of the Round Table will be scattered so that
    nevermore shall I see ye again together as ye are now; let me then see a
    joust and tournament amongst ye for the last time before ye go."

    So they all took their harness and met together in the meadows by Camelot,
    and the queen and all her ladies sat in a tower to see.

    Then Sir Galahad, at the prayer of the king and queen, put on a coat of
    light armour, and a helmet, but shield he would take none, and grasping a
    lance, he drove into the middle of the press of knights, and began to
    break spears marvellously, so that all men were full of wonder. And in so
    short a time he had surmounted and exceeded the rest, save Sir Lancelot
    and Sir Percival, that he took the chief worship of the field.

    Then the king and all the court and fellowship of knights went back to the
    palace, and so to evensong in the great minster, a royal and goodly
    company, and after that sat down to supper in the hall, every knight in
    his own seat, as they had been before.

    Anon suddenly burst overhead the cracking and crying of great peals of
    thunder, till the palace walls were shaken sorely, and they thought to see
    them riven all to pieces.

    And in the midst of the blast there entered in a sunbeam, clearer by seven
    times than ever they saw day, and a marvellous great glory fell upon them
    all. Then each knight, looking on his neighbour, found his face fairer
    than he had ever seen, and so - all standing on their feet - they gazed as
    dumb men on each other, not knowing what to say.

    Then entered into the hall the Sangreal, borne aloft without hands through
    the midst of the sunbeam, and covered with white samite, so that none
    might see it. And all the hall was filled with perfume and incense, and
    every knight was fed with the food he best loved. And when the holy vessel
    had been thus borne through the hall, it suddenly departed, no man saw
    whither.

    When they recovered breath to speak, King Arthur first rose up, and
    yielded thanks to God and to our Lord.

    Then Sir Gawain sprang up and said, "Now have we all been fed by miracle
    with whatsoever food we thought of or desired; but with our eyes we have
    not seen the blessed vessel whence it came, so carefully and preciously it
    was concealed. Therefore, I make a vow, that from to-morrow I shall labour
    twelve months and a day in quest of the Sangreal, and longer if need be;
    nor will I come again into this court until mine eyes have seen it
    evidently."

    When he had spoken thus, knight after knight rose up and vowed himself to
    the same quest, till the most part of the Round Table had thus sworn.

    But when King Arthur heard them all, he could not refrain his eyes from
    tears, and said, "Sir Gawain, Sir Gawain, thou hast set me in great
    sorrow, for I fear me my true fellowship shall never meet together here
    again; and surely never Christian king had such a company of worthy
    knights around his table at one time."

    And when the queen and her ladies and gentlewomen heard the vows, they had
    such grief and sorrow as no tongue could tell; and Queen Guinevere cried
    out, "I marvel that my lord will suffer them to depart from him." And many
    of the ladies who loved knights would have gone with them, but were
    forbidden by the hermit Nacien, who sent this message to all who had sworn
    themselves to the quest: "Take with ye no lady nor gentlewoman, for into
    so high a service as ye go in, no thought but of our Lord and heaven may
    enter."

    On the morrow morning all the knights rose early, and when they were fully
    armed, save shields and helms, they went in with the king and queen to
    service in the minster. Then the king counted all who had taken the
    adventure on themselves, and found them a hundred and fifty knights of the
    Round Table; and so they all put on their helms, and rode away together in
    the midst of cries and lamentations from the court, and from the ladies,
    and from all the town.

    But the queen went alone to her chamber, that no man might see her sorrow;
    and Sir Lancelot followed her to say farewell.

    When she saw him she cried out, "Oh, Sir Lancelot, thou hast betrayed me;
    thou hast put me to death thus to depart and leave my lord the king."

    "Ah, madam," said he, "be not displeased or angry, for I shall come again
    as soon as I can with honour."

    "Alas!" said she, "that ever I saw thee; but He that suffered death upon
    the cross for all mankind be to thee safety and good conduct, and to all
    thy company."

    Then Sir Lancelot saluted her and the king, and went forth with the rest,
    and came with them that night to Castle Vagon, where they abode, and on
    the morrow they departed from each other on their separate ways, every
    knight taking the way that pleased him best.

    Now Sir Galahad went forth without a shield, and rode so four days without
    adventure; and on the fourth day, after evensong, he came to an abbey of
    white monks, where he was received in the house, and led into a chamber.
    And there he was unarmed, and met two knights of the Round Table, King
    Bagdemagus, and Sir Uwaine.

    "Sirs," said Sir Galahad, "what adventure hath brought ye here?"

    "Within this place, as we are told," they answered, "there is a shield no
    man may bear around his neck without receiving sore mischance, or death
    within three days."

    "To-morrow," said King Bagdemagus, "I shall attempt the adventure; and if
    I fail, do thou, Sir Galahad, take it up after me."

    "I will willingly," said he; "for as ye see I have no shield as yet."

    So on the morrow they arose and heard mass, and afterwards King Bagdemagus
    asked where the shield was kept. Then a monk led him behind the altar,
    where the shield hung, as white as any snow, and with a blood-red cross in
    the midst of it.

    "Sir," said the monk, "this shield should hang from no knight's neck
    unless he be the worthiest in the world. I warn ye, therefore, knights;
    consider well before ye dare to touch it."

    "Well," said King Bagdemagus, "I know well that I am far from the best
    knight in all the world, yet shall I make the trial;" and so he took the
    shield, and bore it from the monastery.

    "If it please thee," said he to Sir Galahad, "abide here till thou hearest
    how I speed."

    "I will abide thee," said he.

    Then taking with him a squire who might return with any tidings to Sir
    Galahad, the king rode forth; and before he had gone two miles, he saw in
    a fair valley a hermitage, and a knight who came forth dressed in white
    armour, horse and all, who rode fast against him. When they encountered,
    Bagdemagus brake his spear upon the White Knight's shield, but was himself
    struck through the shoulder with a sore wound, and hurled down from his
    horse. Then the White Knight alighting, came and took the white shield
    from the king, and said, "Thou hast done great folly, for this shield
    ought never to be borne but by one who hath no living peer." And turning
    to the squire, he said, "Bear thou this shield to the good knight, Sir
    Galahad, and greet him well from me."

    "In whose name shall I greet him?" said the squire.

    "Take thou no heed of that," he answered; "it is not for thee or any
    earthly man to know."

    "Now tell me, fair sir, at the least," said the squire, "why may this
    shield be never borne except its wearer come to injury or death?"

    "Because it shall belong to no man save its rightful owner, Galahad,"
    replied the knight.

    Then the squire went to his master, and found him wounded nigh to death,
    wherefore he fetched his horse, and bore him back with him to the abbey.
    And there they laid him in a bed, and looked to his wounds; and when he
    had lain many days grievously sick, he at the last barely escaped with his
    life.

    "Sir Galahad," said the squire, "the knight who overthrew King Bagdemagus
    sent you greeting, and bade you bear this shield."

    "Now blessed be God and fortune," said Sir Galahad, and hung the shield
    about his neck, and armed him, and rode forth.

    Anon he met the White Knight by the hermitage, and each saluted
    courteously the other.

    "Sir," said Sir Galahad, "this shield I bear hath surely a full marvellous
    history."

    "Thou sayest rightly," answered he. "That shield was made in the days of
    Joseph of Arimathea, the gentle knight who took our Lord down from the
    cross. He, when he left Jerusalem with his kindred, came to the country of
    King Evelake, who warred continually with one Tollome; and when, by the
    teaching of Joseph, King Evelake became a Christian, this shield was made
    for him in our Lord's name; and through its aid King Tollome was defeated.
    For when King Evelake met him next in battle, he hid it in a veil, and
    suddenly uncovering it, he showed his enemies the figure of a bleeding man
    nailed to a cross, at sight of which they were discomfited and fled.
    Presently after that, a man whose hand was smitten off touched the cross
    upon the shield, and had his hand restored to him; and many other miracles
    it worked. But suddenly the cross that was upon it vanished away. Anon
    both Joseph and King Evelake came to Britain, and by the preaching of
    Joseph the people were made Christians. And when at length he lay upon his
    death-bed, King Evelake begged of him some token ere he died. Then,
    calling for his shield, he dipped his finger in his own blood, for he was
    bleeding fast, and none could staunch the wound, and marked that cross
    upon it, saying, 'This cross shall ever show as bright as now, and the
    last of my lineage shall wear this shield about his neck, and go forth to
    all the marvellous deeds he will achieve.'"

    When the White Knight had thus spoken he vanished suddenly away, and Sir
    Galahad returned to the abbey.

    As he alighted, came a monk, and prayed him to go see a tomb in the
    churchyard, wherefrom came such a great and hideous noise, that none could
    hear it but they went nigh mad, or lost all strength. "And sir," said he,
    "I deem it is a fiend."

    "Lead me thither," said Sir Galahad.

    When they were come near the place, "Now," said the monk, "go thou to the
    tomb, and lift it up."

    And Galahad, nothing afraid, quickly lifted up the stone, and forthwith
    came out a foul smoke, and from the midst thereof leaped up the loathliest
    figure that ever he had seen in the likeness of man; and Galahad blessed
    himself, for he knew it was a fiend of hell. Then he heard a voice crying
    out, "Oh, Galahad, I cannot tear thee as I would; I see so many angels
    round thee, that I may not come at thee."

    [Illustration: Galahad ... quickly lifted up the stone, and forthwith came
    out a foul smoke.]

    Then the fiend suddenly disappeared with a marvellous great cry; and Sir
    Galahad, looking in the tomb, saw there a body all armed, with a sword
    beside it. "Now, fair brother," said he to the monk, "let us remove this
    cursed body, which is not fit to lie in a churchyard, for when it lived, a
    false and perjured Christian man dwelt in it. Cast it away, and there
    shall come no more hideous noises from the tomb."

    "And now must I depart," he added, "for I have much in hand, and am upon
    the holy quest of the Sangreal, with many more good knights."

    So he took his leave, and rode many journeys backwards and forwards as
    adventure would lead him; and at last one day he departed from a castle
    without first hearing mass, which was it ever his custom to hear before he
    left his lodging. Anon he found a ruined chapel on a mountain, and went in
    and kneeled before the altar, and prayed for wholesome counsel what to do;
    and as he prayed he heard a voice, which said, "Depart, adventurous
    knight, unto the Maiden's Castle, and redress the violence and wrongs
    there done!"

    Hearing these words he cheerfully arose, and mounted his horse, and rode
    but half a mile, when he saw before him a strong castle, with deep ditches
    round it, and a fair river running past. And seeing an old churl hard by,
    he asked him what men called that castle.

    "Fair sir," said he, "it is the Maiden's Castle."

    "It is a cursed place," said Galahad, "and all its masters are but felons,
    full of mischief and hardness and shame."

    "For that good reason," said the old man, "thou wert well-advised to turn
    thee back."

    "For that same reason," quoth Sir Galahad, "will I the more certainly ride
    on."

    Then, looking at his armour carefully, to see that nothing failed him, he
    went forward, and presently there met him seven damsels, who cried out,
    "Sir knight, thou ridest in great peril, for thou hast two waters to pass
    over."

    "Why should I not pass over them?" said he, and rode straight on.

    Anon he met a squire, who said, "Sir knight, the masters of this castle
    defy thee, and bid thee go no further, till thou showest them thy business
    here."

    "Fair fellow," said Sir Galahad, "I am come here to destroy their wicked
    customs."

    "If that be thy purpose," answered he, "thou wilt have much to do."

    "Go thou," said Galahad, "and hasten with my message."

    In a few minutes after rode forth furiously from the gateways of the
    castle seven knights, all brothers, and crying out, "Knight, keep thee,"
    bore down all at once upon Sir Galahad. But thrusting forth his spear, he
    smote the foremost to the earth, so that his neck was almost broken, and
    warded with his shield the spears of all the others, which every one brake
    off from it, and shivered into pieces. Then he drew out his sword, and set
    upon them hard and fiercely, and by his wondrous force drave them before
    him, and chased them to the castle gate, and there he slew them.

    At that came out to him an ancient man, in priest's vestments, saying,
    "Behold, sir, here, the keys of this castle."

    Then he unlocked the gates, and found within a multitude of people, who
    cried out, "Sir knight, ye be welcome, for long have we waited thy
    deliverance," and told him that the seven felons he had slain had long
    enslaved the people round about, and killed all knights who passed that
    way, because the maiden whom they had robbed of the castle had foretold
    that by one knight they should themselves be overthrown.

    "Where is the maiden?" asked Sir Galahad.

    "She lingereth below in a dungeon," said they.

    So Sir Galahad went down and released her, and restored her her
    inheritance; and when he had summoned the barons of the country to do her
    homage, he took his leave, and departed.

    Presently thereafter, as he rode, he entered a great forest, and in a
    glade thereof met two knights, disguised, who proffered him to joust.
    These were Sir Lancelot, his father, and Sir Percival, but neither knew
    the other. So he and Sir Lancelot encountered first, and Sir Galahad smote
    down his father. Then drawing his sword, for his spear was broken, he
    fought with Sir Percival, and struck so mightily that he clave Sir
    Percival's helm, and smote him from his horse.

    Now hard by where they fought there was a hermitage, where dwelt a pious
    woman, a recluse, who, when she heard the sound, came forth, and seeing
    Sir Galahad ride, she cried, "God be with thee, the best knight in the
    world; had yonder knights known thee as well as I do, they would not have
    encountered with thee."

    When Sir Galahad heard that, fearing to be made known, he forthwith smote
    his horse with his spurs, and departed at a great pace.

    Sir Lancelot and Sir Percival heard her words also, and rode fast after
    him, but within awhile he was out of their sight. Then Sir Percival rode
    back to ask his name of the recluse; but Sir Lancelot went forward on his
    quest, and following any path his horse would take, he came by-and-by
    after nightfall to a stone cross hard by an ancient chapel. When he had
    alighted and tied his horse up to a tree, he went and looked in through
    the chapel door, which was all ruinous and wasted, and there within he saw
    an altar, richly decked with silk, whereon there stood a fair candlestick
    of silver, bearing six great lights. And when Sir Lancelot saw the light,
    he tried to get within the chapel, but could find no place. So, being
    passing weary and heavy, he came again to his horse, and when he had
    unsaddled him, and set him free to pasture, he unlaced his helm, and
    ungirded his sword, and laid him down to sleep upon his shield before the
    cross.

    And while he lay between waking and sleeping, he saw come by him two white
    palfreys bearing a litter, wherein a sick knight lay, and the palfreys
    stood still by the cross. Then Sir Lancelot heard the sick man say, "O
    sweet Lord, when shall this sorrow leave me, and the holy vessel pass by
    me, wherethrough I shall be blessed? for I have long endured."

    With that Sir Lancelot saw the chapel open, and the candlestick with the
    six tapers come before the cross, but he could see none who bare it. Then
    came there also a table of silver, and thereon the holy vessel of the
    Sangreal. And when the sick knight saw that, he sat up, and lifting both
    his hands, said, "Fair Lord, sweet Lord, who art here within this holy
    vessel, have mercy on me, that I may be whole;" and therewith he crept
    upon his hands and knees so nigh, that he might touch the vessel; and when
    he had kissed it, he leaped up, and stood and cried aloud, "Lord God, I
    thank Thee, for I am made whole." Then the Holy Grale departed with the
    table and the silver candlestick into the chapel, so that Sir Lancelot saw
    it no more, nor for his sins' sake could he follow it. And the knight who
    was healed went on his way.

    Then Sir Lancelot awake, and marvelled whether he had seen aught but a
    dream. And as he marvelled, he heard a voice saying, "Sir Lancelot, thou
    are unworthy, go thou hence, and withdraw thee from this holy place." And
    when he heard that, he was passing heavy, for he bethought him of his
    sins.

    So he departed weeping, and cursed the day of his birth, for the words
    went into his heart, and he knew wherefore he was thus driven forth. Then
    he went to seek his arms and horse, but could not find them; and then he
    called himself the wretchedest and most unhappy of all knights, and said,
    "My sin hath brought me unto great dishonour: for when I sought earthly
    honours, I achieved them ever; but now I take upon me holy things, my
    guilt doth hinder me, and shameth me; therefore had I no power to stir or
    speak when the holy blood appeared before me."

    So thus he sorrowed till it was day, and he heard the birds sing; then was
    he somewhat comforted, and departing from the cross on foot, he came into
    a wild forest, and to a high mountain, and there he found a hermitage;
    and, kneeling before the hermit down upon both his knees, he cried for
    mercy for his wicked works, and prayed him to hear his confession. But
    when he told his name, the hermit marvelled to see him in so sore a case,
    and said, "Sir, ye ought to thank God more than any knight living, for He
    hath given thee more honour than any; yet for thy presumption, while in
    deadly sin to come into the presence of His flesh and blood, He suffered
    thee neither to see nor follow it. Wherefore, believe that all thy
    strength and manhood will avail thee little, when God is against thee."

    Then Sir Lancelot wept and said, "Now know I well ye tell me truth."

    Then he confessed to him, and told him all his sins, and how he had for
    fourteen years served but Queen Guinevere only, and forgotten God, and
    done great deeds of arms for her, and not for Heaven, and had little or
    nothing thanked God for the honour that he won. And then Sir Lancelot
    said, "I pray you counsel me."

    "I will counsel thee," said he: "never more enter into that queen's
    company when ye can avoid it."

    So Sir Lancelot promised him.

    "Look that your heart and your mouth accord," said the good man, "and ye
    shall have more honour and more nobleness than ever ye have had."

    Then were his arms and horse restored to him, and so he took his leave,
    and rode forth, repenting greatly.

    Now Sir Percival had ridden back to the recluse, to learn who that knight
    was whom she had called the best in the world. And when he had told her
    that he was Sir Percival, she made passing great joy of him, for she was
    his mother's sister, wherefore she opened her door to him, and made him
    good cheer. And on the morrow she told him of her kindred to him, and they
    both made great rejoicing. Then he asked her who that knight was, and she
    told him, "He it is who on Whit Sunday last was clad in the red robe, and
    bare the red arms; and he hath no peer, for he worketh all by miracle, and
    shall be never overcome by any earthly hands."

    "By my goodwill," said Sir Percival, "I will never after these tidings
    have to do with Sir Galahad but in the way of kindness; and I would fain
    learn where I may find him."

    "Fair nephew," said she, "ye must ride to the Castle of Goth, where he
    hath a cousin; by him ye may be lodged, and he will teach you the way to
    go; but if he can tell you no tidings, ride straight to the Castle of
    Carbonek, where the wounded king is lying, for there shall ye surely hear
    true tidings of him."

    So Sir Percival departed from his aunt, and rode till evensong time, when
    he was ware of a monastery closed round with walls and deep ditches, where
    he knocked at the gate, and anon was let in. And there he had good cheer
    that night, and on the morrow heard mass. And beside the altar where the
    priest stood, was a rich bed of silk and cloth of gold; and on the bed
    there lay a man passing old, having a crown of gold upon his head, and all
    his body was full of great wounds, and his eyes almost wholly blind; and
    ever he held up his hands and said, "Sweet Lord, forget not me!"

    Then Sir Percival asked one of the brethren who he was.

    "Sir," said the good man, "ye have heard of Joseph of Arimathea, how he
    was sent of Jesus Christ into this land to preach and teach the Christian
    faith. Now, in the city of Sarras he converted a king named Evelake, and
    this is he. He came with Joseph to this land, and ever desired greatly to
    see the Sangreal; so on a time he came nigh thereto, and was struck almost
    blind. Then he cried out for mercy, and said, 'Fair Lord, I pray thee let
    me never die until a good knight of my blood achieve the Sangreal, and I
    may see and kiss him.' When he had thus prayed, he heard a voice that
    said, 'Thy prayers be heard and answered, for thou shalt not die till that
    knight kiss thee; and when he cometh shall thine eyes be opened and thy
    wounds be healed.' And now hath he lived here for three hundred winters in
    a holy life, and men say a certain knight of King Arthur's court shall
    shortly heal him."

    Thereat Sir Percival marvelled greatly, for he well knew who that knight
    should be; and so, taking his leave of the monk, departed.

    Then he rode on till noon, and came into a valley where he met twenty
    men-at-arms bearing a dead knight on a bier. And they cried to him,
    "Whence comest thou?"

    "From King Arthur's court," he answered.

    Then they all cried together, "Slay him," and set upon him.

    But he smote down the first man to the ground, and his horse upon him;
    whereat seven of them all at once assailed him, and others slew his horse.
    Thus he had been either taken or slain, but by good chance Sir Galahad was
    passing by that way, who, seeing twenty men attacking one, cried, "Slay
    him not," and rushed upon them; and, as fast as his horse could drive, he
    encountered with the foremost man, and smote him down. Then, his spear
    being broken, he drew forth his sword and struck out on the right hand and
    on the left, at each blow smiting down a man, till the remainder fled, and
    he pursued them.

    Then Sir Percival, knowing that it was Sir Galahad, would fain have
    overtaken him, but could not, for his horse was slain. Yet followed he on
    foot as fast as he could go; and as he went there met him a yeoman riding
    on a palfrey, and leading in his hand a great black steed. So Sir Percival
    prayed him to lend him the steed, that he might overtake Sir Galahad. But
    he replied, "That can I not do, fair sir, for the horse is my master's,
    and should I lend it he would slay me." So he departed, and Sir Percival
    sat down beneath a tree in heaviness of heart. And as he sat, anon a
    knight went riding past on the black steed which the yeoman had led. And
    presently after came the yeoman back in haste, and asked Sir Percival if
    he had seen a knight riding his horse.

    "Yea," said Sir Percival.

    "Alas," said the yeoman, "he hath reft him from me by strength, and my
    master will slay me."

    Then he besought Sir Percival to take his hackney and follow, and get back
    his steed. So he rode quickly, and overtook the knight, and cried,
    "Knight, turn again." Whereat he turned and set his spear, and smote Sir
    Percival's hackney in the breast, so that it fell dead, and then went on
    his way. Then cried Sir Percival after him, "Turn now, false knight, and
    fight with me on foot;" but he would not, and rode out of sight.

    Then was Sir Percival passing wroth and heavy of heart, and lay down to
    rest beneath a tree, and slept till midnight. When he awoke he saw a woman
    standing by him, who said to him right fiercely, "Sir Percival, what doest
    thou here?"

    "I do neither good nor evil," said he.

    "If thou wilt promise me," said she, "to do my will whenever I shall ask
    thee, I will bring thee here a horse that will bear thee wheresoever thou
    desirest."

    At that he was full glad, and promised as she asked. Then anon she came
    again, with a great black steed, strong and well apparelled. So Sir
    Percival mounted, and rode through the clear moonlight, and within less
    than an hour had gone a four days' journey, till he came to a rough water
    that roared; and his horse would have borne him into it, but Sir Percival
    would not suffer him, yet could he scarce restrain him. And seeing the
    water so furious, he made the sign of the cross upon his forehead, whereat
    the horse suddenly shook him off, and with a terrible sound leaped into
    the water and disappeared, the waves all burning up in flames around him.
    Then Sir Percival knew it was a fiend which had brought him the horse; so
    he commended himself to God, and prayed that he might escape temptations,
    and continued in prayer till it was day.

    Then he saw that he was on a wild mountain, nigh surrounded on all sides
    by the sea, and filled with wild beasts; and going on into a valley, he
    saw a serpent carrying a young lion by the neck. With that came another
    lion, crying and roaring after the serpent, and anon overtook him, and
    began to battle with him. And Sir Percival helped the lion, and drew his
    sword, and gave the serpent such a stroke that it fell dead. Thereat the
    lion fawned upon him like a dog, licking his hands, and crouching at his
    feet, and at night lay down by him and slept at his side.

    And at noon the next day Sir Percival saw a ship come sailing before a
    strong wind upon the sea towards him, and he rose and went towards it. And
    when it came to shore, he found it covered with white samite, and on the
    deck there stood an old man dressed in priest's robes, who said, "God be
    with you, fair sir; whence come ye?"

    "I am a knight of King Arthur's court," said he, "and follow the quest of
    the Sangreal; but here have I lost myself in this wilderness."

    "Fear nothing," said the old man, "for I have come from a strange country
    to comfort thee."

    Then he told Sir Percival it was a fiend of hell upon which he had ridden
    to the sea, and that the lion, whom he had delivered from the serpent,
    meant the Church. And Sir Percival rejoiced at these tidings, and entered
    into the ship, which presently sailed from the shore into the sea.

    Now when Sir Bors rode forth from Camelot to seek the Sangreal, anon he
    met a holy man riding on an ass, and courteously saluted him.

    "Who are ye, son?" said the good man.

    "I am a knight," said he, "in quest of the Sangreal, and would fain have
    thy counsel, for he shall have much earthly honour who may bring it to a
    favourable end."

    "That is truth," said the good man, "for he shall be the best knight of
    the world; yet know that none shall gain it save by sinless living."

    So they rode to his hermitage together, and there he prayed Sir Bors to
    abide that night, and anon they went into the chapel, and Sir Bors was
    confessed. And they eat bread and drank water together.

    "Now," said the hermit, "I pray thee eat no other food till thou sit at
    the table where the Sangreal shall be." Thereto Sir Bors agreed.

    "Also," said the hermit, "it were wise that ye should wear a sackcloth
    garment next your skin, for penance;" and in this also did Sir Bors as he
    was counselled. And afterwards he armed himself and took his leave.

    Then rode he onwards all that day, and as he rode he saw a passing great
    bird sit in an old dry tree, whereon no leaves were left; and many little
    birds lay round the great one, nigh dead with hunger. Then did the big
    bird smite himself with his own bill, and bled till he died amongst his
    little ones, and they recovered life in drinking up his blood. When Sir
    Bors saw this he knew it was a token, and rode on full of thought. And
    about eventide he came to a tower, whereto he prayed admission, and he was
    received gladly by the lady of the castle. But when a supper of many meats
    and dainties was set before him, he remembered his vow, and bade a squire
    to bring him water, and therein he dipped his bread, and ate.

    Then said the lady, "Sir Bors, I fear ye like not my meat."

    "Yea, truly," said he; "God thank thee, madam; but I may eat no other meat
    this day."

    After supper came a squire, and said, "Madam, bethink thee to provide a
    champion for thee to-morrow for the tourney, or else shall thy sister have
    thy castle."

    At that the lady wept, and made great sorrow. But Sir Bors prayed her to
    be comforted, and asked her why the tournament was held. Then she told him
    how she and her sister were the daughters of King Anianse, who left them
    all his lands between them; and how her sister was the wife of a strong
    knight, named Sir Pridan le Noir, who had taken from herself all her
    lands, save the one tower wherein she dwelt. "And now," said she, "this
    also will they take, unless I find a champion by to-morrow."

    Then said Sir Bors, "Be comforted; to-morrow I will fight for thee;"
    whereat she rejoiced not a little, and sent word to Sir Pridan that she
    was provided and ready. And Sir Bors lay on the floor, and in no bed, nor
    ever would do otherwise till he had achieved his quest.

    On the morrow he arose and clothed himself, and went into the chapel,
    where the lady met him, and they heard mass together. Anon he called for
    his armour, and went with a goodly company of knights to the battle. And
    the lady prayed him to refresh himself ere he should fight, but he refused
    to break his fast until the tournament were done. So they all rode
    together to the lists, and there they saw the lady's eldest sister, and
    her husband, Sir Pridan le Noir. And a cry was made by the heralds that,
    whichever should win, his lady should have all the other's lands.

    Then the two knights departed asunder a little space, and came together
    with such force, that both their spears were shivered, and their shields
    and hauberks pierced through; and both fell to the ground sorely wounded,
    with their horses under them. But swiftly they arose, and drew their
    swords, and smote each other on the head with many great and heavy blows,
    till the blood ran down their bodies; and Sir Pridan was a full good
    knight, so that Sir Bors had more ado than he had thought for to overcome
    him.

    But at last Sir Pridan grew a little faint; that instantly perceived Sir
    Bors, and rushed upon him the more vehemently, and smote him fiercely,
    till he rent off his helm, and then gave him great strokes upon his visage
    with the flat of his sword, and bade him yield or be slain.

    And then Sir Pridan cried him mercy, and said, "For God's sake slay me
    not, and I will never war against thy lady more." So Sir Bors let him go,
    and his wife fled away with all her knights.

    Then all those who had held lands of the lady of the tower came and did
    homage to her again, and swore fealty. And when the country was at peace
    Sir Bors departed, and rode forth into a forest until it was midday, and
    there befell him a marvellous adventure.

    For at a place where two ways parted, there met him two knights, bearing
    Sir Lionel, his brother, all naked, bound on a horse, and as they rode,
    they beat him sorely with thorns, so that the blood trailed down in more
    than a hundred places from his body; but for all this he uttered no word
    or groan, so great he was of heart. As soon as Sir Bors knew his brother,
    he put his spear in rest to run and rescue him; but in the same moment
    heard a woman's voice cry close beside him in the wood, "St. Mary, succour
    thy maid;" and, looking round, he saw a damsel whom a felon knight dragged
    after him into the thickets; and she, perceiving him, cried piteously for
    help, and adjured him to deliver her as he was a sworn knight. Then was
    Sir Bors sore troubled, and knew not what to do, for he thought within
    himself, "If I let my brother be, he will be murdered; but if I help not
    the maid, she is shamed for ever, and my vow compelleth me to set her
    free; wherefore must I first help her, and trust my brother unto God."

    So, riding to the knight who held the damsel, he cried out, "Sir knight,
    lay your hand off that maid, or else ye be but dead."

    At that the knight set down the maid, and dropped his shield, and drew
    forth his sword against Sir Bors, who ran at him, and smote him through
    both shield and shoulder, and threw him to the earth; and when he pulled
    his spear forth, the knight swooned. Then the maid thanked Sir Bors
    heartily, and he set her on the knight's horse, and brought her to her
    men-at-arms, who presently came riding after her. And they made much joy,
    and besought him to come to her father, a great lord, and he should be
    right welcome. But "truly," said he, "I may not at this time, for I have a
    great adventure yet to do;" and commending them to God, he departed in
    great haste to find his brother.

    So he rode, seeking him by the track of the horses a great while. Anon he
    met a seeming holy man riding upon a strong black horse, and asked him,
    had he seen pass by that way a knight led bound and beaten with thorns by
    two others.

    "Yea, truly, such an one I saw," said the man; "but he is dead, and lo!
    his body is hard by in a bush."

    Then he showed him a newly slain body lying in a thick bush, which seemed
    indeed to be Sir Lionel. Then made Sir Bors such mourning and sorrow that
    by-and-by he fell into a swoon upon the ground. And when he came to
    himself again, he took the body in his arms and put it on his horse's
    saddle, and bore it to a chapel hard by, and would have buried it. But
    when he made the sign of the cross, he heard a full great noise and cry as
    though all the fiends of hell had been about him, and suddenly the body
    and the chapel and the old man vanished all away. Then he knew that it was
    the devil who had thus beguiled him, and that his brother yet lived.

    Then held he up his hands to heaven, and thanked God for his own escape
    from hurt, and rode onwards; and anon, as he passed by an hermitage in a
    forest, he saw his brother sitting armed by the door. And when he saw him
    he was filled with joy, and lighted from his horse, and ran to him and
    said, "Fair brother, when came ye hither?"

    But Sir Lionel answered, with an angry face, "What vain words be these,
    when for you I might have been slain? Did ye not see me bound and led away
    to death, and left me in that peril to go succouring a gentlewoman, the
    like whereof no brother ever yet hath done? Now, for thy false misdeed, I
    do defy thee, and ensure thee speedy death."

    Then Sir Bors prayed his brother to abate his anger, and said, "Fair
    brother, remember the love that should be between us twain."

    But Sir Lionel would not hear, and prepared to fight and mounted his horse
    and came before him, crying, "Sir Bors, keep thee from me, for I shall do
    to thee as a felon and a traitor; therefore, start upon thy horse, for if
    thou wilt not, I will run upon thee as thou standest."

    But for all his words Sir Bors would not defend himself against his
    brother. And anon the fiend stirred up Sir Lionel to such rage, that he
    rushed over him and overthrew him with his horse's hoofs, so that he lay
    swooning on the ground. Then would he have rent off his helm and slain
    him, but the hermit of that place ran out, and prayed him to forbear, and
    shielded Sir Bors with his body.

    Then Sir Lionel cried out, "Now, God so help me, sir priest, but I shall
    slay thee else thou depart, and him too after thee."

    And when the good man utterly refused to leave Sir Bors, he smote him on
    the head until he died, and then he took his brother by the helm and
    unlaced it, to have stricken off his head, and so he would have done, but
    suddenly was pulled off backwards by a knight of the Round Table, who, by
    the will of Heaven, was passing by that place - Sir Colgrevance by name.

    "Sir Lionel," he cried, "will ye slay your brother, one of the best
    knights of all the world? That ought no man to suffer."

    "Why," said Sir Lionel, "will ye hinder me and meddle in this strife?
    beware, lest I shall slay both thee and him."

    And when Sir Colgrevance refused to let them be, Sir Lionel defied him,
    and gave him a great stroke through the helmet, whereat Sir Colgrevance
    drew his sword, and smote again right manfully. And so long they fought
    together that Sir Bors awoke from his swoon, and tried to rise and part
    them, but had no strength to stand upon his feet.

    Anon Sir Colgrevance saw him, and cried out to him for help, for now Sir
    Lionel had nigh defeated him. When Sir Bors heard that, he struggled to
    his feet, and put his helmet on, and took his sword. But before he could
    come to him, Sir Lionel had smitten off Sir Colgrevance's helm, and thrown
    him to the earth and slain him. Then turned he to his brother as a man
    possessed by fiends, and gave him such a stroke as bent him nearly double.

    But still Sir Bors prayed him for God's sake to quit that battle, "For if
    it befell us that we either slew the other we should die for care of that
    sin."

    "Never will I spare thee if I master thee," cried out Sir Lionel.

    Then Sir Bors drew his sword all weeping, and said, "Now, God have mercy
    on me, though I defend my life against my brother;" with that he lifted up
    his sword to strike, but suddenly he heard a mighty voice, "Put up thy
    sword, Sir Bors, and flee, or thou shalt surely slay him." And then there
    fell upon them both a fiery cloud, which flamed and burned their shields,
    and they fell to the earth in sore dread.

    Anon Sir Bors rose to his feet, and saw that Sir Lionel had taken no harm.
    Then came the voice again, and said, "Sir Bors, go hence and leave thy
    brother, and ride thou forward to the sea, for there Sir Percival abideth
    thee."

    Then he said to his brother, "Brother, forgive me all my trespass against
    thee."

    And Sir Lionel answered, "God forgive it thee, as I do."

    Then he departed and rode to the sea, and on the strand he found a ship
    all covered with white samite, and as soon as he had entered thereinto,
    it put forth from the shore. And in the midst of the ship there stood an
    armed knight, whom he knew to be Sir Percival. Then they rejoiced greatly
    over each other, and said, "We lack nothing now but the good knight Sir
    Galahad."

    Now when Sir Galahad had rescued Sir Percival from the twenty knights he
    rode into a vast forest. And after many days it befell that he came to a
    castle whereat was a tournament. And the knights of the castle were put to
    the worse; which when he saw, he set his spear in rest and ran to help
    them, and smote down many of their adversaries. And as it chanced, Sir
    Gawain was amongst the stranger knights, and when he saw the white shield
    with the red cross, he knew it was Sir Galahad, and proffered to joust
    with him. So they encountered, and having broken their spears, they drew
    their swords, and Sir Galahad smote Sir Gawain so sorely on the helm that
    he clove it through, and struck on slanting to the earth, carving the
    horse's shoulder in twain, and Sir Gawain fell to the earth. Then Sir
    Galahad beat back all who warred against the castle, yet would he not wait
    for thanks, but rode away that no man might know him.

    And he rested that night at a hermitage, and when he was asleep, he heard
    a knocking at the door. So he rose, and found a damsel there, who said,
    "Sir Galahad, I will that ye arm you, and mount upon your horse and follow
    me, for I will show you within these three days the highest adventure that
    ever any knight saw."

    Anon Sir Galahad armed him, and took his horse, and commended himself to
    God, and bade the gentlewoman go, and he would follow where she liked.

    So they rode onwards to the sea as fast as their horses might gallop, and
    at night they came to a castle in a valley, inclosed by running water, and
    by strong and high walls, whereinto they entered and had great cheer, for
    the lady of the castle was the damsel's mistress.

    And when he was unarmed, the damsel said to her lady, "Madam, shall we
    abide here this night?"

    "Nay," said she, "but only till he hath dined and slept a little."

    So he ate and slept a while, till the maid called him, and armed him by
    torchlight; and when he had saluted the lady of the castle, the damsel and
    Sir Galahad rode on.

    Anon they came to the seaside, and lo! the ship, wherein were Sir Percival
    and Sir Bors, abode by the shore. Then they cried, "Welcome, Sir Galahad,
    for we have awaited thee long."

    Then they rejoiced to see each other, and told of all their adventures and
    temptations. And the damsel went into the ship with them, and spake to Sir
    Percival: "Sir Percival, know ye not who I am?"

    And he replied, "Nay, certainly, I know thee not."

    Then said she, "I am thy sister, the daughter of King Pellinore, and am
    sent to help thee and these knights, thy fellows, to achieve the quest
    which ye all follow."

    So Sir Percival rejoiced to see his sister, and they departed from the
    shore. And after a while they came upon a whirlpool, where their ship
    could not live. Then saw they another greater ship hard by and went
    towards it, but saw neither man nor woman therein. And on the end of it
    these words were written, "Thou who shalt enter me, beware that thou be in
    steadfast belief, for I am Faith; and if thou doubtest, I cannot help
    thee." Then were they all adread, but, commending themselves to God, they
    entered in.

    As soon as they were on board they saw a fair bed; whereon lay a crown of
    silk, and at the foot was a fair and rich sword drawn from its scabbard
    half a foot and more. The pommel was of precious stones of many colours,
    every colour having a different virtue, and the scales of the haft were of
    two ribs of different beasts. The one was bone of a serpent from Calidone
    forest, named the serpent of the fiend; and its virtue saveth all men who
    hold it from weariness. The other was of a fish that haunteth the floods
    of Euphrates, named Ertanax; and its virtue causeth whoever holdeth it to
    forget all other things, whether of joy or pain, save the thing he seeth
    before him.

    "In the name of God," said Sir Percival, "I shall assay to handle this
    sword; "and set his hand to it, but could not grasp it. "By my faith,"
    said he, "now have I failed."

    Sir Bors set his hand to it, and failed also.

    Then came Sir Galahad, and saw these letters written red as blood, "None
    shall draw me forth save the hardiest of all men; but he that draweth me
    shall never be shamed or wounded to death." "By my faith," said Sir
    Galahad, "I would draw it forth, but dare not try."

    "Ye may try safely," said the gentlewoman, Sir Percival's sister, "for be
    ye well assured the drawing of this sword is forbid to all but you. For
    this was the sword of David, King of Israel, and Solomon his son made for
    it this marvellous pommel and this wondrous sheath, and laid it on this
    bed till thou shouldest come and take it up; and though before thee some
    have dared to raise it, yet have they all been maimed or wounded for their
    daring."

    "Where," said Sir Galahad, "shall we find a girdle for it?"

    "Fair sir," said she, "dismay you not;" and therewith took from out a box
    a girdle, nobly wrought with golden thread, set full of precious stones
    and with a rich gold buckle. "This girdle, lords," said she, "is made for
    the most part of mine own hair, which, while I was yet in the world, I
    loved full well; but when I knew that this adventure was ordained me, I
    cut off and wove as ye now see."

    [Illustration: "This girdle, lords," said she, "is made for the most part
    of mine own hair, which, while I was yet in the world, I loved full
    well."]

    Then they all prayed Sir Galahad to take the sword, and so anon he gripped
    it in his fingers; and the maiden girt it round his waist, saying, "Now
    reck I not though I die, for I have made thee the worthiest knight of all
    the world."

    "Fair damsel," said Sir Galahad, "ye have done so much that I shall be
    your knight all the days of my life."

    Then the ship sailed a great way on the sea, and brought them to land near
    the Castle of Carteloise. When they were landed came a squire and asked
    them, "Be ye of King Arthur's court?"

    "We are," said they.

    "In an evil hour are ye come," said he, and went back swiftly to the
    castle.

    Within a while they heard a great horn blow, and saw a multitude of
    well-armed knights come forth, who bade them yield or die. At that they
    ran together, and Sir Percival smote one to the earth and mounted his
    horse, and so likewise did Sir Bors and Sir Galahad, and soon had they
    routed all their enemies and alighted on foot, and with their swords slew
    them downright, and entered into the castle.

    Then came there forth a priest, to whom Sir Galahad kneeled and said, "In
    sooth, good father, I repent me of this slaughter; but we were first
    assailed, or else it had not been."

    "Repent ye not," said the good man, "for if ye lived as long as the world
    lasted ye could do no better deed, for these were all the felon sons of a
    good knight, Earl Hernox, whom they have thrown into a dungeon, and in his
    name have slain priests and clerks, and beat down chapels far and near."

    Then Sir Galahad prayed the priest to bring him to the earl; who, when he
    saw Sir Galahad, cried out, "Long have I waited for thy coming, and now I
    pray thee hold me in thine arms that I may die in peace."

    And therewith, when Sir Galahad had taken him in his arms, his soul
    departed from his body.

    Then came a voice in the hearing of them all, "Depart now, Sir Galahad,
    and go quickly to the maimed king, for he hath long abided to receive
    health from thy hand."

    So the three knights departed, and Sir Percival's sister with them, and
    came to a vast forest, and saw before them a white hart, exceeding fair,
    led by four lions; and marvelling greatly at that sight, they followed.

    Anon they came to a hermitage and a chapel, whereunto the hart entered,
    and the lions with it. Then a priest offered mass, and presently they saw
    the hart change into the figure of a man, most sweet and comely to behold;
    and the four lions also changed and became a man, an eagle, a lion, and an
    ox. And suddenly all those five figures vanished without sound. Then the
    knights marvelled greatly, and fell upon their knees, and when they rose
    they prayed the priest to tell them what that sight might mean.

    "What saw ye, sirs?" said he, "for I saw nothing." Then they told him.

    "Ah, lords!" said he, "ye are full welcome; now know I well ye be the
    knights who shall achieve the Sangreal, for unto them alone such
    mysteries are revealed. The hart ye saw is One above all men, white and
    without blemish, and the four lions with Him are the four evangelists."

    When they heard that they heartily rejoiced, and thanking the priest,
    departed.

    Anon, as they passed by a certain castle, an armed knight suddenly came
    after them, and cried out to the damsel, "By the holy cross, ye shall not
    go till ye have yielded to the custom of the castle."

    "Let her go," said Sir Percival, "for a maiden, wheresoever she cometh, is
    free."

    "Whatever maiden passeth here," replied the knight, "must give a dishful
    of her blood from her right arm."

    "It is a foul and shameful custom," cried Sir Galahad and both his
    fellows, "and sooner will we die than let this maiden yield thereto."

    "Then shall ye die," replied the knight, and as he spake there came out
    from a gate hard by, ten or twelve more, and encountered with them,
    running upon them vehemently with a great cry. But the three knights
    withstood them, and set their hands to their swords, and beat them down
    and slew them.

    At that came forth a company of threescore knights, all armed. "Fair
    lords," said Sir Galahad, "have mercy on yourselves and keep from us."

    "Nay, fair lords," they answered, "rather be advised by us, and yield ye
    to our custom."

    "It is an idle word," said Galahad, "in vain ye speak it."

    "Well," said they, "will ye die?"

    "We be not come thereto as yet," replied Sir Galahad.

    Then did they fall upon each other, and Sir Galahad drew forth his sword,
    and smote on the right hand and on the left, and slew so mightily that
    all who saw him thought he was a monster and no earthly man. And both his
    comrades helped him well, and so they held the field against that
    multitude till it was night. Then came a good knight forward from the
    enemy and said, "Fair knights, abide with us to-night and be right
    welcome; by the faith of our bodies as we are true knights, to-morrow ye
    shall rise unharmed, and meanwhile maybe ye will, of your own accord,
    accept the custom of the castle when ye know it better."

    So they entered and alighted and made great cheer. Anon, they asked them
    whence that custom came. "The lady of this castle is a leper," said they,
    "and can be no way cured save by the blood of a pure virgin and a king's
    daughter; therefore to save her life are we her servants bound to stay
    every maid that passeth by, and try if her blood may not cure our
    mistress."

    Then said the damsel, "Take ye of my blood as much as ye will, if it may
    avail your lady."

    And though the three knights urged her not to put her life in that great
    peril, she replied, "If I die to heal another's body, I shall get health
    to my soul," and would not be persuaded to refuse.

    So on the morrow she was brought to the sick lady, and her arm was bared,
    and a vein thereof was opened, and the dish filled with her blood. Then
    the sick lady was anointed therewith, and anon she was whole of her
    malady. With that Sir Percival's sister lifted up her hand and blessed
    her, saying, "Madam, I am come to my death to make you whole; for God's
    love pray for me;" and thus saying she fell down in a swoon.

    Then Sir Galahad, Sir Percival, and Sir Bors started to lift her up and
    staunch her blood, but she had lost too much to live. So when she came to
    herself she said to Sir Percival, "Fair brother, I must die for the
    healing of this lady, and now, I pray thee, bury me not here, but when I
    am dead put me in a boat at the next haven and let me float at venture on
    the sea. And when ye come to the city of Sarras, to achieve the Sangreal,
    shall ye find me waiting by a tower, and there I pray thee bury me, for
    there shall Sir Galahad and ye also be laid." Thus having said, she died.

    Then Sir Percival wrote all the story of her life and put it in her right
    hand, and so laid her in a barge and covered it with silk. And the wind
    arising drove the barge from land, and all the knights stood watching it
    till it was out of sight.

    Anon they returned to the castle, and forthwith fell a sudden tempest of
    thunder and lightning and rain, as if the earth were broken up: and half
    the castle was thrown down. Then came a voice to the three knights which
    said, "Depart ye now asunder till ye meet again where the maimed king is
    lying." So they parted and rode divers ways.

    Now after Sir Lancelot had left the hermit, he rode a long while till he
    knew not whither to turn, and so he lay down to sleep, if haply he might
    dream whither to go.

    And in his sleep a vision came to him saying, "Lancelot, rise up and take
    thine armour, and enter the first ship that thou shalt find."

    When he awoke he obeyed the vision, and rode till he came to the
    sea-shore, and found there a ship without sails or oars, and as soon as he
    was in it he smelt the sweetest savour he had ever known, and seemed
    filled with all things he could think of or desire. And looking round he
    saw a fair bed, and thereon a gentlewoman lying dead, who was Sir
    Percival's sister. And as Sir Lancelot looked on her he spied the writing
    in her right hand, and, taking it, he read therein her story. And more
    than a month thereafter he abode in that ship and was nourished by the
    grace of Heaven, as Israel was fed with manna in the desert.

    And on a certain night he went ashore to pass the time, for he was
    somewhat weary, and, listening, he heard a horse come towards him, from
    which a knight alighted and went up into the ship; who, when he saw Sir
    Lancelot, said, "Fair sir, ye be right welcome to mine eyes, for I am thy
    son Galahad, and long time I have sought for thee." With that he kneeled
    and asked his blessing, and took off his helm and kissed him, and the
    great joy there was between them no tongue can tell.

    Then for half a year they dwelt together in the ship, and served God night
    and day with all their powers, and went to many unknown islands, where none
    but wild beasts haunted, and there found many strange and perilous
    adventures.

    And upon a time they came to the edge of a forest, before a cross of
    stone, and saw a knight armed all in white, leading a white horse. Then
    the knight saluted them, and said to Galahad, "Ye have been long time
    enough with your father; now, therefore, leave him and ride this horse
    till ye achieve the Holy Quest."

    Then went Sir Galahad to his father and kissed him full courteously, and
    said, "Fair father, I know not when I shall see thee again."

    And as he took his horse a voice spake in their hearing, "Ye shall meet no
    more in this life."

    "Now, my son, Sir Galahad," said Sir Lancelot, "since we must so part and
    see each other never more, I pray the High Father of Heaven to preserve
    both you and me."

    Then they bade farewell, and Sir Galahad entered the forest, and Sir
    Lancelot returned to the ship, and the wind rose and drove him more than a
    month through the sea, whereby he slept but little, yet ever prayed that
    he might see the Sangreal.

    So it befell upon a certain midnight, the moon shining clear, he came
    before a fair and rich castle, whereof the postern gate was open towards
    the sea, having no keeper save two lions in the entry.

    Anon Sir Lancelot heard a voice: "Leave now thy ship and go within the
    castle, and thou shalt see a part of thy desire."

    Then he armed and went towards the gate, and coming to the lions he drew
    out his sword, but suddenly a dwarf rushed out and smote him on the arm,
    so that he dropt his sword, and heard again the voice, "Oh, man of evil
    faith, and poor belief, wherefore trustest thou thine arms above thy
    Maker?" Then he put up his sword and signed the cross upon his forehead,
    and so passed by the lions without hurt.

    And going in, he found a chamber with the door shut, which in vain he
    tried to open. And listening thereat he heard a voice within, which sang
    so sweetly that it seemed no earthly thing, "Joy and honour be to the
    Father of Heaven!" Then he kneeled down at the door, for he knew well the
    Sangreal was there within.

    Anon the door was opened without hands, and forthwith came thereout so
    great a splendour as if all the torches of the world had been alight
    together. But when he would have entered in, a voice forbad him; wherefore
    he drew back, and looked, standing upon the threshold of the door. And
    there he saw a table of silver, and the holy vessel covered with red
    samite, and many angels round it holding burning candles and a cross and
    all the ornaments of the altar.

    Then a priest stood up and offered mass, and when he took the vessel up,
    he seemed to sink beneath that burden. At that Sir Lancelot cried, "O
    Father, take it not for sin that I go in to help the priest, who hath much
    need thereof." So saying, he went in, but when he came towards the table
    he felt a breath of fire which issued out therefrom and smote him to the
    ground, so that he had no power to rise.

    Then felt he many hands about him, which took him up and laid him down
    outside the chapel door. There lay he in a swoon all through that night,
    and on the morrow certain people found him senseless, and bore him to an
    inner chamber and laid him on a bed. And there he rested, living, but
    moving no limbs, twenty-four days and nights.

    On the twenty-fifth day he opened his eyes and saw those standing round,
    and said, "Why have ye waked me? for I have seen marvels that no tongue
    can tell, and more than any heart can think."

    Then he asked where he was, and they told him, "In the Castle of
    Carbonek."

    "Tell your lord, King Pelles," said he, "that I am Sir Lancelot."

    At that they marvelled greatly, and told their lord it was Sir Lancelot
    who had lain there so long.

    Then was King Pelles wondrous glad and went to see him, and prayed him to
    abide there for a season. But Sir Lancelot said, "I know well that I have
    now seen as much as mine eyes may behold of the Sangreal; wherefore I will
    return to my own country." So he took leave of King Pelles, and departed
    towards Logris.

    Now after Sir Galahad had parted from Sir Lancelot, he rode many days,
    till he came to the monastery where the blind King Evelake lay, whom Sir
    Percival had seen. And on the morrow, when he had heard mass, Sir Galahad
    desired to see the king, who cried out, "Welcome, Sir Galahad, servant of
    the Lord! long have I abided thy coming. Take me now in thine arms, that I
    may die in peace."

    At that Sir Galahad embraced him; and when he had so done the king's eyes
    were opened, and he said, "Fair Lord Jesus, suffer me now to come to
    Thee;" and anon his soul departed.

    Then they buried him royally, as a king should be; and Sir Galahad went on
    his way.

    Within a while he came to a chapel in a forest, in the crypt whereof he
    saw a tomb which always blazed and burnt. And asking the brethren what
    that might mean, they told him, "Joseph of Arimathea's son did found this
    monastery, and one who wronged him hath lain here these three hundred and
    fifty years and burneth evermore, until that perfect knight who shall
    achieve the Sangreal doth quench the fire."

    Then said he, "I pray ye bring me to the tomb."

    And when he touched the place immediately the fire was quenched, and a
    voice came from the grave and cried, "Thanks be to God, who now hath
    purged me of my sin, and draweth me from earthly pains into the joys of
    paradise."

    Then Sir Galahad took the body in his arms and bore it to the abbey, and
    on the morrow put it in the earth before the high altar.

    Anon he departed from thence and rode five days in a great forest; and
    after that he met Sir Percival, and a little further on Sir Bors. When
    they had told each other their adventures, they rode together to the
    Castle of Carbonek: and there King Pelles gave them hearty welcome, for he
    knew they should achieve the Holy Quest.

    As soon as they were come into the castle, a voice cried in the midst of
    the chamber, "Let them who ought not now to sit at the table of the Lord
    rise and depart hence!" Then all, save those three knights, departed.

    Anon they saw other knights come in with haste at the hall doors and take
    their harness off, who said to Sir Galahad, "Sir, we have tried sore to be
    with you at this table."

    "Ye be welcome," said he, "but whence are ye?"

    So three of them said they were from Gaul; and three from Ireland; and
    three from Denmark.

    Then came forth the likeness of a bishop, with a cross in his hand, and
    four angels stood by him, and a table of silver was before them, whereon
    was set the vessel of the Sangreal. Then came forth other angels also - two
    bearing burning candles, and the third a towel, and the fourth a spear
    which bled marvellously, the drops wherefrom fell into a box he held in
    his left hand. Anon the bishop took the wafer up to consecrate it, and at
    the lifting up, they saw the figure of a Child, whose visage was as bright
    as any fire, which smote itself into the midst of the wafer and vanished,
    so that all saw the flesh made bread.

    Thereat the bishop went to Galahad and kissed him, and bade him go and
    kiss his fellows; and said, "Now, servants of the Lord, prepare for food
    such as none ever yet were fed with since the world began."

    With that he vanished, and the knights were filled with a great dread and
    prayed devoutly.

    Then saw they come forth from the holy vessel the vision of a man bleeding
    all openly, whom they knew well by the tokens of His passion for the Lord
    Himself. At that they fell upon their faces and were dumb. Anon he brought
    the Holy Grale to them and spake high words of comfort, and, when they
    drank therefrom, the taste thereof was sweeter than any tongue could tell
    or heart desire. Then a voice said to Galahad, "Son, with this blood which
    drippeth from the spear anoint thou the maimed king and heal him. And when
    thou hast this done, depart hence with thy brethren in a ship that ye
    shall find, and go to the city of Sarras. And bear with thee the holy
    vessel, for it shall no more be seen in the realm of Logris."

    At that Sir Galahad walked to the bleeding spear, and therefrom anointing
    his fingers went out straightway to the maimed King Pelles, and touched
    his wound. Then suddenly he uprose from his bed as whole a man as ever he
    was, and praised God passing thankfully with all his heart.

    Then Sir Galahad, Sir Bors, and Sir Percival departed as they had been
    told; and when they had ridden three days they came to the sea-shore, and
    found the ship awaiting them. Therein they entered, and saw in the midst
    the silver table and the vessel of the Sangreal, covered with red samite.
    Then were they passing glad, and made great reverence thereto. And Sir
    Galahad prayed that now he might leave the world and pass to God. And
    presently, the while he prayed, a voice said to him, "Galahad, thy prayer
    is heard, and when thou asketh the death of the body thou shalt have it,
    and find the life of thy soul."

    But while they prayed and slept the ship sailed on, and when they woke
    they saw the city of Sarras before them, and the other ship wherein was
    Sir Percival's sister. Then the three knights took up the holy table and
    the Sangreal and went into the city; and there, in a chapel, they buried
    Sir Percival's sister right solemnly.

    Now at the gate of the town they saw an old cripple sitting, whom Sir
    Galahad called to help them bear their weight.

    "Truly," said the old man, "it is ten years since I have gone a step
    without these crutches."

    "Care ye not," said Sir Galahad; "rise now and show goodwill."

    So he assayed to move, and found his limbs as strong as any man's might
    be, and running to the table helped to carry it.

    Anon there rose a rumour in the city that a cripple had been healed by
    certain marvellous strange knights.

    But the king, named Estouranse, who was a heathen tyrant, when he heard
    thereof took Sir Galahad and his fellows, and put them in prison in a deep
    hole. Therein they abode a great while, but ever the Sangreal was with
    them and fed them with marvellous sweet food, so that they fainted not,
    but had all joy and comfort they could wish.

    At the year's end the king fell sick and felt that he should die. Then
    sent he for the three knights, and when they came before him prayed their
    mercy for his trespasses against them. So they forgave him gladly, and
    anon he died.

    Then the chief men of the city took counsel together who should be king in
    his stead, and as they talked, a voice cried in their midst, "Choose ye
    the youngest of the three knights King Estouranse cast into prison for
    your king." At that they sought Sir Galahad and made him king with the
    assent of all the city, and else they would have slain him.

    But within a twelvemonth came to him, upon a certain day, as he prayed
    before the Sangreal, a man in likeness of a bishop, with a great company
    of angels round about him, who offered mass, and afterwards called to Sir
    Galahad, "Come forth, thou servant of the Lord, for the time hath come
    thou hast desired so long."

    Then Sir Galahad lifted up his hands and prayed, "Now, blessed Lord! would
    I no longer live if it might please Thee."

    Anon the bishop gave him the sacrament, and when he had received it with
    unspeakable gladness, he said, "Who art thou, father?"

    "I am Joseph of Arimathea," answered he, "whom our Lord hath sent to bear
    thee fellowship."

    When he heard that, Sir Galahad went to Sir Percival and Sir Bors and
    kissed them and commended them to God, saying, "Salute for me Sir
    Lancelot, my father, and bid him remember this unstable world."

    Therewith he kneeled down and prayed, and suddenly his soul departed, and
    a multitude of angels bare it up to heaven. Then came a hand from heaven
    and took the vessel and the spear and bare them out of sight.

    Since then was never man so hardy as to say that he had seen the Sangreal.

    And after all these things, Sir Percival put off his armour and betook him
    to an hermitage, and within a little while passed out of this world. And
    Sir Bors, when he had buried him beside his sister, returned, weeping sore
    for the loss of his two brethren, to King Arthur, at Camelot.




    CHAPTER XIII

    _Sir Lancelot and the Fair Maid of Astolat_


    Now after the quest of the Sangreal was fulfilled and all the knights who
    were left alive were come again to the Round Table, there was great joy in
    the court. And passing glad were King Arthur and Queen Guinevere to see
    Sir Lancelot and Sir Bors, for they had been long absent in that quest.

    And so greatly was Sir Lancelot's fame now spread abroad that many ladies
    and damsels daily resorted to him and besought him for their champion; and
    all right quarrels did he gladly undertake for the pleasure of our Lord
    Christ. And always as much as he might he withdrew him from the queen.

    Wherefore Queen Guinevere, who counted him for her own knight, grew wroth
    with him, and on a certain day she called him to her chamber, and said
    thus: "Sir Lancelot, I daily see thy loyalty to me doth slack, for ever
    thou art absent from this court, and takest other ladies' quarrels on thee
    more than ever thou wert wont. Now do I understand thee, false knight, and
    therefore shall I never trust thee more. Depart now from my sight, and
    come no more within this court upon pain of thy head." With that she
    turned from him and would hear no excuses.

    So Sir Lancelot departed in heaviness of heart, and calling Sir Bors, Sir
    Ector, and Sir Lionel, he told them how the queen had dealt with him.

    "Fair sir," replied Sir Bors, "remember what honour ye have in this
    country, and how ye are called the noblest knight in the world; wherefore
    go not, for women are hasty, and do often what they sore repent of
    afterwards. Be ruled by my advice. Take horse and ride to the hermitage
    beside Windsor, and there abide till I send ye better tidings."

    To that Sir Lancelot consented, and departed with a sorrowful countenance.

    Now when the queen heard of his leaving she was inwardly sorry, but made
    no show of grief, bearing a proud visage outwardly. And on a certain day
    she made a costly banquet to all the knights of the Round Table, to show
    she had as great joy in all others as in Sir Lancelot. And at the banquet
    were Sir Gawain, and his brothers Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris, and Sir
    Gareth; also Sir Modred, Sir Bors, Sir Blamor, Sir Bleoberis, Sir Ector,
    Sir Lionel, Sir Palomedes, Sir Mador de la Port, and his cousin Sir
    Patrice - a knight of Ireland, Sir Pinell le Savage, and many more.

    Now Sir Pinell hated Sir Gawain because he had slain one of his kinsmen by
    treason; and Sir Gawain had a great love for all kinds of fruit, which,
    when Sir Pinell knew, he poisoned certain apples that were set upon the
    table, with intent to slay him. And so it chanced as they ate and made
    merry, Sir Patrice, who sat next to Sir Gawain, took one of the poisoned
    apples and eat it, and when he had eaten he suddenly swelled up and fell
    down dead.

    At that every knight leapt from the board ashamed and enraged nigh out of
    their wits, for they knew not what to say, yet seeing that the queen had
    made the banquet they all had suspicion of her.

    "My lady the queen," said Sir Gawain, "I wit well this fruit was meant for
    me, for all men know my love for it, and now had I been nearly slain;
    wherefore, I fear me, ye will be ashamed."

    "This shall not end so," cried Sir Mador de la Port; "now have I lost a
    noble knight of my own blood, and for this despite and shame I will be
    revenged to the uttermost."

    Then he challenged Queen Guinevere concerning the death of his cousin, but
    she stood still, sore abashed, and anon with her sorrow and dread, she
    swooned.

    At the noise and sudden cry came in King Arthur, and to him appealed Sir
    Mador, and impeached the queen.

    "Fair lords," said he, "full sorely am I troubled at this matter, for I
    must be rightful judge, and therein it repenteth me I may not do battle
    for my wife, for, as I deem, this deed was none of hers. But I suppose she
    will not lack a champion, and some good knight surely will put his body in
    jeopardy to save her."

    But all who had been bidden to the banquet said they could not hold the
    queen excused, or be her champions, for she had made the feast, and either
    by herself or servants must it have come.

    "Alas!" said the queen, "I made this dinner for a good intent, and no
    evil, so God help me in my need."

    "My lord the king," said Sir Mador, "I require you heartily as you be a
    righteous king give me a day when I may have justice."

    "Well," said the king, "I give ye this day fifteen days, when ye shall be
    ready and armed in the meadow beside Westminster, and if there be a
    knight to fight with you, God speed the right, and if not, then must my
    queen be burnt."

    When the king and queen were alone together he asked her how this case
    befell.

    "I wot not how or in what manner," answered she.

    "Where is Sir Lancelot?" said King Arthur, "for he would not grudge to do
    battle for thee."

    "Sir," said she, "I cannot tell you, but all his kinsmen deem he is not in
    this realm."

    "These be sad tidings," said the king; "I counsel ye to find Sir Bors, and
    pray him for Sir Lancelot's sake to do this battle for you."

    So the queen departed and sent for Sir Bors to her chamber, and besought
    his succour.

    "Madam," said he, "what would you have me do? for I may not with my honour
    take this matter on me, for I was at that same dinner, and all the other
    knights would have me ever in suspicion. Now do ye miss Sir Lancelot, for
    he would not have failed you in right nor yet in wrong, as ye have often
    proved, but now ye have driven him from the country."

    "Alas! fair knight," said the queen, "I put me wholly at your mercy, and
    all that is done amiss I will amend as ye will counsel me."

    And therewith she kneeled down upon both her knees before Sir Bors, and
    besought him to have mercy on her.

    Anon came in King Arthur also, and prayed him of his courtesy to help her,
    saying, "I require you for the love of Lancelot."

    "My lord," said he, "ye require the greatest thing of me that any man can
    ask, for if I do this battle for the queen I shall anger all my fellows of
    the Table Round; nevertheless, for my lord Sir Lancelot's sake, and for
    yours, I will that day be the queen's champion, unless there chance to
    come a better knight than I am to do battle for her." And this he promised
    on his faith.

    Then were the king and queen passing glad, and thanked him heartily, and
    so departed.

    But Sir Bors rode in secret to the hermitage where Sir Lancelot was, and
    told him all these tidings.

    "It has chanced as I would have it," said Sir Lancelot; "yet make ye ready
    for the battle, but tarry till ye see me come."

    "Sir," said Sir Bors, "doubt not but ye shall have your will."

    But many of the knights were greatly wroth with him when they heard he was
    to be the queen's champion, for there were few in the court but deemed her
    guilty.

    Then said Sir Bors, "Wit ye well, fair lords, it were a shame to us all to
    suffer so fair and noble a lady to be burnt for lack of a champion, for
    ever hath she proved herself a lover of good knights; wherefore I doubt
    not she is guiltless of this treason."

    At that were some well pleased, but others rested passing wroth.

    And when the day was come, the king and queen and all the knights went to
    the meadow beside Westminster, where the battle should be fought. Then the
    queen was put in ward, and a great fire was made round the iron stake,
    where she must be burnt if Sir Mador won the day.

    So when the heralds blew, Sir Mador rode forth, and took oath that Queen
    Guinevere was guilty of Sir Patrice's death, and his oath he would prove
    with his body against any who would say the contrary. Then came forth Sir
    Bors, and said, "Queen Guinevere is in the right, and that will I prove
    with my hands."

    With that they both departed to their tents to make ready for the battle.
    But Sir Bors tarried long, hoping Sir Lancelot would come, till Sir Mador
    cried out to King Arthur, "Bid thy champion come forth, unless he dare
    not." Then was Sir Bors ashamed, and took his horse and rode to the end of
    the lists.

    But ere he could meet Sir Mador he was ware of a knight upon a white
    horse, armed at all points, and with a strange shield, who rode to him and
    said, "I pray you withdraw from this quarrel, for it is mine, and I have
    ridden far to fight in it."

    Thereat Sir Bors rode to King Arthur, and told him that another knight was
    come who would do battle for the queen.

    "Who is he?" said King Arthur.

    "I may not tell you," said Sir Bors; "but he made a covenant with me to be
    here to-day, wherefore I am discharged."

    Then the king called that knight, and asked him if he would fight for the
    queen.

    "Therefore came I hither, Sir king," answered he; "but let us tarry no
    longer, for anon I have other matters to do. But wit ye well," said he to
    the Knights of the Round Table, "it is shame to ye for such a courteous
    queen to suffer this dishonour."

    And all men marvelled who this knight might be, for none knew him save Sir
    Bors.

    Then Sir Mador and the knight rode to either end of the lists, and
    couching their spears, ran one against the other with all their might; and
    Sir Mador's spear broke short, but the strange knight bore both him and
    his horse down to the ground. Then lightly they leaped from their saddles
    and drew their swords, and so came eagerly to the battle, and either gave
    the other many sad strokes and sore and deep wounds.

    Thus they fought nigh an hour, for Sir Mador was a full strong and valiant
    knight. But at last the strange knight smote him to the earth, and gave
    him such a buffet on the helm as wellnigh killed him. Then did Sir Mador
    yield, and prayed his life.

    [Illustration: At last the strange knight smote him to the earth, and gave
    him such a buffet on the helm as well-nigh killed him. ]

    "I will but grant it thee," said the strange knight, "if thou wilt release
    the queen from this quarrel for ever, and promise that no mention shall be
    made upon Sir Patrice's tomb that ever she consented to that treason."

    "All this shall be done," said Sir Mador.

    Then the knights parters took up Sir Mador and led him to his tent, and
    the other knight went straight to the stair foot of King Arthur's throne;
    and by that time was the queen come to the king again, and kissed him
    lovingly.

    Then both the king and she stooped down, and thanked the knight, and
    prayed him to put off his helm and rest him, and to take a cup of wine.
    And when he put his helmet off to drink, all people saw it was Sir
    Lancelot. But when the queen beheld him she sank almost to the ground
    weeping for sorrow and for joy, that he had done her such great goodness
    when she had showed him such unkindness.

    Then the knights of his blood gathered round him, and there was great joy
    and mirth in the court. And Sir Mador and Sir Lancelot were soon healed of
    their wounds; and not long after came the Lady of the Lake to the court,
    and told all there by her enchantments how Sir Pinell, and not the queen,
    was guilty of Sir Patrice's death. Whereat the queen was held excused of
    all men, and Sir Pinell fled the country.

    So Sir Patrice was buried in the church of Winchester, and it was written
    on his tomb that Sir Pinell slew him with a poisoned apple, in error for
    Sir Gawain. Then, through Sir Lancelot's favour, the queen was reconciled
    to Sir Mador, and all was forgiven.

    Now fifteen days before the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady, the king
    proclaimed a tourney to be held that feast-day at Camelot, whereat himself
    and the King of Scotland would joust with all who should come against
    them. So thither went the King of North Wales, and King Anguish of
    Ireland, and Sir Galahaut the noble prince, and many other nobles of
    divers countries.

    And King Arthur made ready to go, and would have had the queen go with
    him, but she said that she was sick. Sir Lancelot, also, made excuses,
    saying he was not yet whole of his wounds.

    At that the king was passing heavy and grieved, and so departed alone
    towards Camelot. And by the way he lodged in a town called Astolat, and
    lay that night in the castle.

    As soon as he had gone, Sir Lancelot said to the queen, "This night I will
    rest, and to-morrow betimes will I take my way to Camelot; for at these
    jousts I will be against the king and his fellowship."

    "Ye may do as ye list," said Queen Guinevere; "but by my counsel ye will
    not be against the king, for in his company are many hardy knights, as ye
    well know."

    "Madam," said Sir Lancelot, "I pray ye be not displeased with me, for I
    will take the adventure that God may send me."

    And on the morrow he went to the church and heard mass, and took his leave
    of the queen, and so departed.

    Then he rode long till he came to Astolat, and there lodged at the castle
    of an old baron called Sir Bernard of Astolat, which was near the castle
    where King Arthur lodged. And as Sir Lancelot entered the king espied him,
    and knew him. Then said he to the knights, "I have just seen a knight who
    will fight full well at the joust toward which we go."

    "Who is it?" asked they.

    "As yet ye shall not know," he answered smiling.

    When Sir Lancelot was in his chamber unarming, the old baron came to him
    saluting him, though as yet he knew not who he was.

    Now Sir Bernard had a daughter passing beautiful, called the Fair Maid of
    Astolat, and when she saw Sir Lancelot she loved him from that instant
    with her whole heart, and could not stay from gazing on him.

    On the morrow, Sir Lancelot asked the old baron to lend him a strange
    shield. "For," said he, "I would be unknown."

    "Sir," said his host, "ye shall have your desire, for here is the shield
    of my eldest son, Sir Torre, who was hurt the day he was made knight, so
    that he cannot ride; and his shield, therefore, is not known. And, if it
    please you, my youngest son, Sir Lavaine, shall ride with you to the
    jousts, for he is of his age full strong and mighty; and I deem ye be a
    noble knight, wherefore I pray ye tell me your name."

    "As to that," said Sir Lancelot, "ye must hold me excused at this time,
    but if I speed well at the jousts, I will come again and tell you; but in
    anywise let me have your son, Sir Lavaine, with me, and lend me his
    brother's shield."

    Then, ere they departed, came Elaine, the baron's daughter, and said to
    Sir Lancelot, "I pray thee, gentle knight, to wear my token at to-morrow's
    tourney."

    "If I should grant you that, fair damsel," said he, "ye might say that I
    did more for you than ever I have done for lady or damsel."

    Then he bethought him that if he granted her request he would be the more
    disguised, for never before had he worn any lady's token. So anon he said,
    "Fair damsel, I will wear thy token on my helmet if thou wilt show it me."

    Thereat was she passing glad, and brought him a scarlet sleeve broidered
    with pearls, which Sir Lancelot took, and put upon his helm. Then he
    prayed her to keep his shield for him until he came again, and taking Sir
    Torre's shield instead, rode forth with Sir Lavaine towards Camelot.

    On the morrow the trumpets blew for the tourney, and there was a great
    press of dukes and earls and barons and many noble knights; and King
    Arthur sat in a gallery to behold who did the best. So the King of
    Scotland and his knights, and King Anguish of Ireland rode forth on King
    Arthur's side; and against them came the King of North Wales, the King of
    a Hundred Knights, the King of Northumberland, and the noble prince Sir
    Galahaut.

    But Sir Lancelot and Sir Lavaine rode into a little wood behind the party
    which was against King Arthur, to watch which side should prove the
    weakest.

    Then was there a strong fight between the two parties, for the King of a
    Hundred Knights smote down the King of Scotland; and Sir Palomedes, who
    was on King Arthur's side, overthrew Sir Galahaut. Then came fifteen
    Knights of the Round Table and beat back the Kings of Northumberland and
    North Wales with their knights.

    "Now," said Sir Lancelot to Sir Lavaine, "if ye will help me, ye shall
    see yonder fellowship go back as fast as they came."

    "Sir," said Sir Lavaine, "I will do what I can."

    Then they rode together into the thickest of the press, and there, with
    one spear, Sir Lancelot smote down five Knights of the Round Table, one
    after other, and Sir Lavaine overthrew two. And taking another spear, for
    his own was broken, Sir Lancelot smote down four more knights, and Sir
    Lavaine a fifth. Then, drawing his sword, Sir Lancelot fought fiercely on
    the right hand and the left, and unhorsed Sir Safire, Sir Epinogris, and
    Sir Galleron. At that the Knights of the Round Table withdrew themselves
    as well as they were able.

    "Now, mercy," said Sir Gawain, who sat by King Arthur; "what knight is
    that who doth such marvellous deeds of arms? I should deem him by his
    force to be Sir Lancelot, but that he wears a lady's token on his helm as
    never Lancelot doth."

    "Let him be," said King Arthur; "he will be better known, and do more ere
    he depart."

    Thus the party against King Arthur prospered at this time, and his knights
    were sore ashamed. Then Sir Bors, Sir Ector, and Sir Lionel called
    together the knights of their blood, nine in number, and agreed to join
    together in one band against the two strange knights. So they encountered
    Sir Lancelot all at once, and by main force smote his horse to the ground;
    and by misfortune Sir Bors struck Sir Lancelot through the shield into the
    side, and the spear broke off and left the head in the wound.

    When Sir Lavaine saw that, he ran to the King of Scotland and struck him
    off his horse, and brought it to Sir Lancelot, and helped him to mount.
    Then Sir Lancelot bore Sir Bors and his horse to the ground, and in like
    manner served Sir Ector and Sir Lionel; and turning upon three other
    knights he smote them down also; while Sir Lavaine did many gallant deeds.

    But feeling himself now sorely wounded Sir Lancelot drew his sword, and
    proffered to fight with Sir Bors, who, by this time, was mounted anew. And
    as they met, Sir Ector and Sir Lionel came also, and the swords of all
    three drave fiercely against him. When he felt their buffets, and his
    wound that was so grievous, he determined to do all his best while he
    could yet endure, and smote Sir Bors a blow that bent his head down nearly
    to the ground and razed his helmet off and pulled him from his horse.

    Then rushing at Sir Ector and Sir Lionel, he smote them down, and might
    have slain all three, but when he saw their faces his heart forbade him.
    Leaving them, therefore, on the field, he hurled into the thickest of the
    press, and did such feats of arms as never were beheld before.

    And Sir Lavaine was with him through it all, and overthrew ten knights;
    but Sir Lancelot smote down more than thirty, and most of them Knights of
    the Round Table.

    Then the king ordered the trumpets to blow for the end of the tourney, and
    the prize to be given by the heralds to the knight with the white shield
    who bore the red sleeve.

    But ere Sir Lancelot was found by the heralds, came the King of the
    Hundred Knights, the King of North Wales, the King of Northumberland, and
    Sir Galahaut, and said to him, "Fair knight, God bless thee, for much have
    ye done this day for us; wherefore we pray ye come with us and receive
    the honour and the prize as ye have worshipfully deserved it."

    "My fair lords," said Sir Lancelot, "wit ye well if I have deserved
    thanks, I have sore bought them, for I am like never to escape with my
    life; therefore I pray ye let me depart, for I am sore hurt. I take no
    thought of honour, for I had rather rest me than be lord of all the
    world." And therewith he groaned piteously, and rode a great gallop away
    from them.

    And Sir Lavaine rode after him, sad at heart, for the broken spear still
    stuck fast in Sir Lancelot's side, and the blood streamed sorely from the
    wound. Anon they came near a wood more than a mile from the lists, where
    he knew he could be hidden.

    Then said he to Sir Lavaine, "O gentle knight, help me to pull out this
    spear-head from my side, for the pain thereof nigh killeth me."

    "Dear lord," said he, "I fain would help ye; but I dread to draw it forth,
    lest ye should die for loss of blood."

    "I charge you as you love me," said Sir Lancelot, "draw it out."

    So they dismounted, and with a mighty wrench Sir Lavaine drew the spear
    forth from Sir Lancelot's side; whereat he gave a marvellous great shriek
    and ghastly groan, and all his blood leaped forth in a full stream. Then
    he sank swooning to the earth, with a visage pale as death.

    "Alas!" cried Sir Lavaine, "what shall I do now?"

    And then he turned his master's face towards the wind, and sat by him nigh
    half an hour while he lay quiet as one dead. But at the last he lifted up
    his eyes, and said, "I pray ye bear me on my horse again, and lead me to a
     hermit who dwelleth within two miles hence, for he was formerly a knight
    of Arthur's court, and now hath mighty skill in medicine and herbs."

    So with great pain Sir Lavaine got him to his horse, and led him to the
    hermitage within the wood, beside a stream. Then knocked he with his spear
    upon the door, and prayed to enter. At that a child came out, to whom he
    said, "Fair child, pray the good man thy master to come hither and let in
    a knight who is sore wounded."

    Anon came out the knight-hermit, whose name was Sir Baldwin, and asked,
    "Who is this wounded knight?"

    "I know not," said Sir Lavaine, "save that he is the noblest knight I ever
    met with, and hath done this day such marvellous deeds of arms against
    King Arthur that he hath won the prize of the tourney."

    Then the hermit gazed long on Sir Lancelot, and hardly knew him, so pale
    he was with bleeding, yet said he at the last, "Who art thou, lord?"

    Sir Lancelot answered feebly, "I am a stranger knight adventurous, who
    laboureth through many realms to win worship."

    "Why hidest thou thy name, dear lord, from me?" cried Sir Baldwin; "for in
    sooth I know thee now to be the noblest knight in all the world - my lord
    Sir Lancelot du Lake, with whom I long had fellowship at the Round Table."

    "Since ye know me, fair sir," said he, "I pray ye, for Christ's sake, to
    help me if ye may."

    "Doubt not," replied he, "that ye shall live and fare right well."

    Then he staunched his wound, and gave him strong medicines and cordials
    till he was refreshed from his faintness and came to himself again.

    Now after the jousting was done King Arthur held a feast, and asked to see
    the knight with the red sleeve that he might take the prize. So they told
    him how that knight had ridden from the field wounded nigh to death.
    "These be the worst tidings I have heard for many years," cried out the
    king; "I would not for my kingdom he were slain."

    Then all men asked, "Know ye him, lord?"

    "I may not tell ye at this time," said he; "but would to God we had good
    tidings of him."

    Then Sir Gawain prayed leave to go and seek that knight, which the king
    gladly gave him. So forthwith he mounted and rode many leagues round
    Camelot, but could hear no tidings.

    Within two days thereafter King Arthur and his knights returned from
    Camelot, and Sir Gawain chanced to lodge at Astolat, in the house of Sir
    Bernard. And there came in the fair Elaine to him, and prayed him news of
    the tournament, and who won the prize. "A knight with a white shield,"
    said he, "who bare a red sleeve in his helm, smote down all comers and won
    the day."

    At that the visage of Elaine changed suddenly from white to red, and
    heartily she thanked our Lady.

    Then said Sir Gawain, "Know ye that knight?" and urged her till she told
    him that it was her sleeve he wore. So Sir Gawain knew it was for love
    that she had given it; and when he heard she kept his proper shield he
    prayed to see it.

    As soon as it was brought he saw Sir Lancelot's arms thereon, and cried,
    "Alas! now am I heavier of heart than ever yet."

    "Wherefore?" said fair Elaine.

    "Fair damsel," answered he, "know ye not that the knight ye love is of
    all knights the noblest in the world, Sir Lancelot du Lake? With all my
    heart I pray ye may have joy of each other, but hardly dare I think that
    ye shall see him in this world again, for he is so sore wounded he may
    scarcely live, and is gone out of sight where none can find him."

    Then was Elaine nigh mad with grief and sorrow, and with piteous words she
    prayed her father that she might go seek Sir Lancelot and her brother. So
    in the end her father gave her leave, and she departed.

    And on the morrow came Sir Gawain to the court, and told how he had found
    Sir Lancelot's shield in Elaine's keeping, and how it was her sleeve which
    he had worn; whereat all marvelled, for Sir Lancelot had done for her more
    than he had ever done for any woman.

    But when Queen Guinevere heard it she was beside herself with wrath, and
    sending privily for Sir Bors, who sorrowed sorely that through him Sir
    Lancelot had been hurt - "Have ye now heard," said she, "how falsely Sir
    Lancelot hath betrayed me?"

    "I beseech thee, madam," said he, "speak not so, for else I may not hear
    thee."

    "Shall I not call him traitor," cried she, "who hath worn another lady's
    token at the jousting?"

    "Be sure he did it, madam, for no ill intent," replied Sir Bors, "but that
    he might be better hidden, for never did he in that wise before."

    "Now shame on him, and thee who wouldest help him," cried the queen.

    "Madam, say what ye will," said he; "but I must haste to seek him, and God
    send me soon good tidings of him."

    So with that he departed to find Sir Lancelot.

    Now Elaine had ridden with full haste from Astolat, and come to Camelot,
    and there she sought throughout the country for any news of Lancelot. And
    so it chanced that Sir Lavaine was riding near the hermitage to exercise
    his horse, and when she saw him she ran up and cried aloud, "How doth my
    lord Sir Lancelot fare?"

    Then said Sir Lavaine, marvelling greatly, "How know ye my lord's name,
    fair sister?"

    So she told him how Sir Gawain had lodged with Sir Bernard, and knew Sir
    Lancelot's shield.

    Then prayed she to see his lord forthwith, and when she came to the
    hermitage and found him lying there sore sick and bleeding, she swooned
    for sorrow. Anon, as she revived, Sir Lancelot kissed her, and said, "Fair
    maid, I pray ye take comfort, for, by God's grace, I shall be shortly
    whole of this wound, and if ye be come to tend me, I am heartily bounden
    to your great kindness." Yet was he sore vexed to hear Sir Gawain had
    discovered him, for he knew Queen Guinevere would be full wroth because of
    the red sleeve.

    So Elaine rested in the hermitage, and ever night and day she watched and
    waited on Sir Lancelot, and would let none other tend him. And as she saw
    him more, the more she set her love upon him, and could by no means
    withdraw it. Then said Sir Lancelot to Sir Lavaine, "I pray thee set some
    to watch for the good knight Sir Bors, for as he hurt me, so will he
    surely seek for me."

    Now Sir Bors by this time had come to Camelot, and was seeking for Sir
    Lancelot everywhere, so Sir Lavaine soon found him, and brought him to the
    hermitage.

    And when he saw Sir Lancelot pale and feeble, he wept for pity and sorrow
    that he had given him that grievous wound. "God send thee a right speedy
    cure, dear lord," said he; "for I am of all men most unhappy to have
    wounded thee, who art our leader, and the noblest knight in all the
    world."

    "Fair cousin," said Sir Lancelot, "be comforted, for I have but gained
    what I sought, and it was through pride that I was hurt, for had I warned
    ye of my coming it had not been; wherefore let us speak of other things."

    So they talked long together, and Sir Bors told him of the queen's anger.
    Then he asked Sir Lancelot, "Was it from this maid who tendeth you so
    lovingly ye had the token?"

    "Yea," said Sir Lancelot; "and would I could persuade her to withdraw her
    love from me."

    "Why should ye do so?" said Sir Bors; "for she is passing fair and loving.
    I would to heaven ye could love her."

    "That may not be," replied he; "but it repenteth me in sooth to grieve
    her."

    Then they talked of other matters, and of the great jousting at
    Allhallowtide next coming, between King Arthur and the King of North
    Wales.

    "Abide with me till then," said Sir Lancelot, "for by that time I trust to
    be all whole again, and we will go together."

    So Elaine daily and nightly tending him, within a month he felt so strong
    he deemed himself full cured. Then on a day, when Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine
    were from the hermitage, and the knight-hermit also was gone forth, Sir
    Lancelot prayed Elaine to bring him some herbs from the forest.

    When she was gone he rose and made haste to arm himself, and try if he
    were whole enough to joust, and mounted on his horse, which was fresh with
    lack of labour for so long a time. But when he set his spear in the rest
    and tried his armour, the horse bounded and leapt beneath him, so that Sir
    Lancelot strained to keep him back. And therewith his wound, which was not
    wholly healed, burst forth again, and with a mighty groan he sank down
    swooning on the ground.

    At that came fair Elaine and wept and piteously moaned to see him lying
    so. And when Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine came back, she called them traitors
    to let him rise, or to know any rumour of the tournament. Anon the hermit
    returned and was wroth to see Sir Lancelot risen, but within a while he
    recovered him from his swoon and staunched the wound. Then Sir Lancelot
    told him how he had risen of his own will to assay his strength for the
    tournament. But the hermit bad him rest and let Sir Bors go alone, for
    else would he sorely peril his life. And Elaine, with tears, prayed him in
    the same wise, so that Sir Lancelot in the end consented.

    So Sir Bors departed to the tournament, and there he did such feats of
    arms that the prize was given between him and Sir Gawain, who did like
    valiantly.

    And when all was over he came back and told Sir Lancelot, and found him so
    nigh well that he could rise and walk. And within a while thereafter he
    departed from the hermitage and went with Sir Bors, Sir Lavaine, and fair
    Elaine to Astolat, where Sir Bernard joyfully received them.

    But after they had lodged there a few days Sir Lancelot and Sir Bors must
    needs depart and return to King Arthur's court.

    So when Elaine knew Sir Lancelot must go, she came to him and said, "Have
    mercy on me, fair knight, and let me not die for your love."

    Then said Sir Lancelot, very sad at heart, "Fair maid, what would ye that
    I should do for you?"

    "If I may not be your wife, dear lord," she answered, "I must die."

    "Alas!" said he, "I pray heaven that may not be; for in sooth I may not be
    your husband. But fain would I show ye what thankfulness I can for all
    your love and kindness to me. And ever will I be your knight, fair maiden;
    and if it chance that ye shall ever wed some noble knight, right heartily
    will I give ye such a dower as half my lands will bring."

    "Alas! what shall that aid me?" answered she; "for I must die," and
    therewith she fell to the earth in a deep swoon.

    Then was Sir Lancelot passing heavy of heart, and said to Sir Bernard and
    Sir Lavaine, "What shall I do for her?"

    "Alas!" said Sir Bernard, "I know well that she will die for your sake."

    And Sir Lavaine said, "I marvel not that she so sorely mourneth your
    departure, for truly I do as she doth, and since I once have seen you,
    lord, I cannot leave you."

    So anon, with a full sorrowful heart, Sir Lancelot took his leave, and Sir
    Lavaine rode with him to the court. And King Arthur and the Knights of the
    Round Table joyed greatly to see him whole of his wound, but Queen
    Guinevere was sorely wroth, and neither spake with him nor greeted him.

    Now when Sir Lancelot had departed, the Maid of Astolat could neither eat,
    nor drink, not sleep for sorrow; and having thus endured ten days, she
    felt within herself that she must die.

    Then sent she for a holy man, and was shriven and received the sacrament.
    But when he told her she must leave her earthly thoughts, she answered,
    "Am I not an earthly woman? What sin is it to love the noblest knight of
    all the world? And, by my truth, I am not able to withstand the love
    whereof I die; wherefore, I pray the High Father of Heaven to have mercy
    on my soul."

    Then she besought Sir Bernard to indite a letter as she should devise, and
    said, "When I am dead put this within my hand, and dress me in my fairest
    clothes, and lay me in a barge all covered with black samite, and steer it
    down the river till it reach the court. Thus, father, I beseech thee let
    it be."

    Then, full of grief, he promised her it should be so. And anon she died,
    and all the household made a bitter lamentation over her.

    Then did they as she had desired, and laid her body, richly dressed, upon
    a bed within the barge, and a trusty servant steered it down the river
    towards the court.

    Now King Arthur and Queen Guinevere sat at a window of the palace, and saw
    the barge come floating with the tide, and marvelled what was laid
    therein, and sent a messenger to see, who, soon returning, prayed them to
    come forth.

    When they came to the shore they marvelled greatly, and the king asked of
    the serving-men who steered the barge what this might mean. But he made
    signs that he was dumb, and pointed to the letter in the damsel's hands.
    So King Arthur took the letter from the hand of the corpse, and found
    thereon written, "To the noble knight, Sir Lancelot du Lake."

    Then was Sir Lancelot sent for, and the letter read aloud by a clerk, and
    thus it was written: -

    [Illustration: Then was Sir Lancelot sent for, and the letter read aloud
    by a clerk.]

    "Most noble knight, my lord Sir Lancelot, now hath death for ever parted
    us. I, whom men call the Maid of Astolat, set my love upon you, and have
    died for your sake. This is my last request, that ye pray for my soul and
    give me burial. Grant me this, Sir Lancelot, as thou art a peerless
    knight."

    At these words the queen and all the knights wept sore for pity.

    Then said Sir Lancelot, "My lord, I am right heavy for the death of this
    fair damsel; and God knoweth that right unwillingly I caused it, for she
    was good as she was fair, and much was I beholden to her; but she loved me
    beyond measure, and asked me that I could not give her."

    "Ye might have shown her gentleness enough to save her life," answered the
    queen.

    "Madam," said he, "she would but be repaid by my taking her to wife, and
    that I could not grant her, for love cometh of the heart and not by
    constraint."

    "That is true," said the king; "for love is free."

    "I pray you," said Sir Lancelot, "let me now grant her last asking, to be
    buried by me."

    So on the morrow, he caused her body to be buried richly and solemnly, and
    ordained masses for her soul, and made great sorrow over her.

    Then the queen sent for Sir Lancelot, and prayed his pardon for her wrath
    against him without cause. "This is not the first time it hath been so,"
    answered he; "yet must I ever bear with ye, and so do I now forgive you."

    So Queen Guinevere and Sir Lancelot were made friends again; but anon such
    favour did she show him, as in the end brought many evils on them both and
    all the realm.




    CHAPTER XIV

    _The War between King Arthur and Sir Lancelot and the Death of King
    Arthur_


    Within a while thereafter was a jousting at the court, wherein Sir
    Lancelot won the prize. And two of those he smote down were Sir Agravaine,
    the brother of Sir Gawain, and Sir Modred, his false brother - King
    Arthur's son by Belisent. And because of his victory they hated Sir
    Lancelot, and sought how they might injure him.

    So on a night, when King Arthur was hunting in the forest, and the queen
    sent for Sir Lancelot to her chamber, they two espied him; and thinking
    now to make a scandal and a quarrel between Lancelot and the king, they
    found twelve others, and said Sir Lancelot was ever now in the queen's
    chamber, and King Arthur was dishonoured.

    Then, all armed, they came suddenly round the queen's door, and cried,
    "Traitor! now art thou taken."

    "Madam, we be betrayed," said Sir Lancelot; "yet shall my life cost these
    men dear."

    Then did the queen weep sore, and dismally she cried, "Alas! there is no
    armour here whereby ye might withstand so many; wherefore ye will be
    slain, and I be burnt for the dread crime they will charge on me."

    But while she spake the shouting of the knights was heard without,
    "Traitor, come forth, for now thou art snared!"

    "Better were twenty deaths at once than this vile outcry," said Sir
    Lancelot.

    Then he kissed her and said, "Most noble lady, I beseech ye, as I have
    ever been your own true knight, take courage; pray for my soul if I be now
    slain, and trust my faithful friends, Sir Bors and Sir Lavaine, to save
    you from the fire."

    But ever bitterly she wept and moaned, and cried, "Would God that they
    would take and slay me, and that thou couldest escape."

    "That shall never be," said he. And wrapping his mantle round his arm he
    unbarred the door a little space, so that but one could enter.

    Then first rushed in Sir Chalaunce, a full strong knight, and lifted up
    his sword to smite Sir Lancelot; but lightly he avoided him, and struck
    Sir Chalaunce, with his hand, such a sore buffet on the head as felled him
    dead upon the floor.

    Then Sir Lancelot pulled in his body and barred the door again, and
    dressed himself in his armour, and took his drawn sword in his hand.

    But still the knights cried mightily without the door, "Traitor, come
    forth!"

    [Illustration: But still the knights cried mightily without the door,
    "Traitor, come forth!"]

    "Be silent and depart," replied Sir Lancelot; "for be ye sure ye will not
    take me, and to-morrow will I meet ye face to face before the king."

    "Ye shall have no such grace," they cried; "but we will slay thee, or take
    thee as we list."

    "Then save yourselves who may," he thundered, and therewith suddenly
    unbarred the door and rushed forth at them. And at the first blow he slew
    Sir Agravaine, and after him twelve other knights, with twelve more mighty
    buffets. And none of all escaped him save Sir Modred, who, sorely wounded,
    fled away for life.

    Then returned he to the queen, and said, "Now, madam, will I depart, and
    if ye be in any danger I pray ye come to me."

    "Surely will I stay here, for I am queen," she answered; "yet if to-morrow
    any harm come to me I trust to thee for rescue."

    "Have ye no doubt of me," said he, "for ever while I live am I your own
    true knight."

    Therewith he took his leave, and went and told Sir Bors and all his
    kindred of this adventure. "We will be with thee in this quarrel," said
    they all; "and if the queen be sentenced to the fire, we certainly will
    save her."

    Meanwhile Sir Modred, in great fear and pain, fled from the court, and
    rode until he found King Arthur, and told him all that had befallen. But
    the king would scarce believe him till he came and saw the bodies of Sir
    Agravaine and all the other knights.

    Then felt he in himself that all was true, and with his passing grief his
    heart nigh broke. "Alas!" cried he, "now is the fellowship of the Round
    Table for ever broken: yea, woe is me! I may not with my honour spare my
    queen."

    Anon it was ordained that Queen Guinevere should be burned to death,
    because she had dishonoured King Arthur.

    But when Sir Gawain heard thereof, he came before the king, and said, "My
    lord, I counsel thee be not too hasty in this matter, but stay the
    judgment of the queen a season, for it may well be that Sir Lancelot was
    in her chamber for no evil, seeing she is greatly beholden to him for so
    many deeds done for her sake, and peradventure she had sent to him to
    thank him, and did it secretly that she might avoid slander."

    But King Arthur answered, full of grief, "Alas! I may not help her; she is
    judged as any other woman."

    Then he required Sir Gawain and his brethren, Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth,
    to be ready to bear the queen to-morrow to the place of execution.

    "Nay, noble lord," replied Sir Gawain, "that can I never do; for neither
    will my heart suffer me to see the queen die, nor shall men ever say I was
    of your counsel in this matter."

    Then said his brothers, "Ye may command us to be there, but since it is
    against our will, we will be without arms, that we may do no battle
    against her."

    So on the morrow was Queen Guinevere led forth to die by fire, and a
    mighty crowd was there, of knights and nobles, armed and unarmed. And all
    the lords and ladies wept sore at that piteous sight. Then was she shriven
    by a priest, and the men came nigh to bind her to the stake and light the
    fire.

    At that Sir Lancelot's spies rode hastily and told him and his kindred,
    who lay hidden in a wood hard by; and suddenly, with twenty knights, he
    rushed into the midst of all the throng to rescue her.

    But certain of King Arthur's knights rose up and fought with them, and
    there was a full great battle and confusion. And Sir Lancelot drave
    fiercely here and there among the press, and smote on every side, and at
    every blow struck down a knight, so that many were slain by him and his
    fellows.

    Then was the queen set free, and caught up on Sir Lancelot's saddle and
    fled away with him and all his company to the Castle of La Joyous Garde.

    Now so it chanced that, in the turmoil of the fighting, Sir Lancelot had
    unawares struck down and slain the two good knights Sir Gareth and Sir
    Gaheris, knowing it not, for he fought wildly, and saw not that they were
    unarmed.

    When King Arthur heard thereof, and of all that battle, and the rescue of
    the queen, he sorrowed heavily for those good knights, and was passing
    wroth with Lancelot and the queen.

    But when Sir Gawain heard of his brethren's death he swooned for sorrow
    and wrath, for he wist that Sir Lancelot had killed them in malice. And as
    soon as he recovered he ran in to the king, and said, "Lord king and
    uncle, hear this oath which now I swear, that from this day I will not
    fail Sir Lancelot till one of us hath slain the other. And now, unless ye
    haste to war with him, that we may be avenged, will I myself alone go
    after him."

    Then the king, full of wrath and grief, agreed thereto, and sent letters
    throughout the realm to summon all his knights, and went with a vast army
    to besiege the Castle of La Joyous Garde. And Sir Lancelot, with his
    knights, mightily defended it; but never would he suffer any to go forth
    and attack one of the king's army, for he was right loth to fight against
    him.

    So when fifteen weeks were passed, and King Arthur's army wasted itself in
    vain against the castle, for it was passing strong, it chanced upon a day
    Sir Lancelot was looking from the walls and espied King Arthur and Sir
    Gawain close beside.

    "Come forth, Sir Lancelot," said King Arthur right fiercely, "and let us
    two meet in the midst of the field."

    "God forbid that I should encounter with thee, lord, for thou didst make
    me a knight," replied Sir Lancelot.

    Then cried Sir Gawain, "Shame on thee, traitor and false knight, yet be ye
    well assured we will regain the queen and slay thee and thy company; yea,
    double shame on ye to slay my brother Gaheris unarmed, Sir Gareth also,
    who loved ye so well. For that treachery, be sure I am thine enemy till
    death."

    "Alas!" cried Sir Lancelot, "that I hear such tidings, for I knew not I
    had slain those noble knights, and right sorely now do I repent it with a
    heavy heart. Yet abate thy wrath, Sir Gawain, for ye know full well I did
    it by mischance, for I loved them ever as my own brothers."

    "Thou liest, false recreant," cried Sir Gawain, fiercely.

    At that Sir Lancelot was wroth, and said, "I well see thou art now mine
    enemy, and that there can be no more peace with thee, or with my lord the
    king, else would I gladly give back the queen."

    Then the king would fain have listened to Sir Lancelot, for more than all
    his own wrong did he grieve at the sore waste and damage of the realm, but
    Sir Gawain persuaded him against it, and ever cried out foully on Sir
    Lancelot.

    When Sir Bors and the other knights of Lancelot's party heard the fierce
    words of Sir Gawain, they were passing wroth, and prayed to ride forth and
    be avenged on him, for they were weary of so long waiting to no good. And
    in the end Sir Lancelot, with a heavy heart, consented.

    So on the morrow the hosts on either side met in the field, and there was
    a great battle. And Sir Gawain prayed his knights chiefly to set upon Sir
    Lancelot; but Sir Lancelot commanded his company to forbear King Arthur
    and Sir Gawain.

    So the two armies jousted together right fiercely, and Sir Gawain
    proffered to encounter with Sir Lionel, and overthrew him. But Sir Bors,
    and Sir Blamor, and Sir Palomedes, who were on Sir Lancelot's side, did
    great feats of arms, and overthrew many of King Arthur's knights.

    Then the king came forth against Sir Lancelot, but Sir Lancelot forbore
    him and would not strike again.

    At that Sir Bors rode up against the king and smote him down. But Sir
    Lancelot cried, "Touch him not on pain of thy head," and going to King
    Arthur he alighted and gave him his own horse, saying, "My lord, I pray
    thee forbear this strife, for it can bring to neither of us any honour."

    And when King Arthur looked on him the tears came to his eyes as he
    thought of his noble courtesy, and he said within himself, "Alas! that
    ever this war began."

    But on the morrow Sir Gawain led forth the army again, and Sir Bors
    commanded on Sir Lancelot's side. And they two struck together so fiercely
    that both fell to the ground sorely wounded; and all the day they fought
    till night fell, and many were slain on both sides, yet in the end neither
    gained the victory.

    But by now the fame of this fierce war spread through all Christendom, and
    when the Pope heard thereof he sent a Bull, and charged King Arthur to
    make peace with Lancelot, and receive back Queen Guinevere; and for the
    offence imputed to her absolution should be given by the Pope.

    Thereto would King Arthur straightway have obeyed, but Sir Gawain ever
    urged him to refuse.

    When Sir Lancelot heard thereof, he wrote thus to the king: "It was never
    in my thought, lord, to withhold thy queen from thee; but since she was
    condemned for my sake to death, I deemed it but a just and knightly part
    to rescue her therefrom; wherefore I recommend me to your grace, and
    within eight days will I come to thee and bring the queen in safety."

    Then, within eight days, as he had said, Sir Lancelot rode from out the
    castle with Queen Guinevere, and a hundred knights for company, each
    carrying an olive branch, in sign of peace. And so they came to the court,
    and found King Arthur sitting on his throne, with Sir Gawain and many
    other knights around him. And when Sir Lancelot entered with the queen,
    they both kneeled down before the king.

    Anon Sir Lancelot rose and said, "My lord, I have brought hither my lady
    the queen again, as right requireth, and by commandment of the Pope and
    you. I pray ye take her to your heart again and forget the past. For
    myself I may ask nothing, and for my sin I shall have sorrow and sore
    punishment; yet I would to heaven I might have your grace."

    But ere the king could answer, for he was moved with pity at his words,
    Sir Gawain cried aloud, "Let the king do as he will, but be sure, Sir
    Lancelot, thou and I shall never be accorded while we live, for thou has
    slain my brethren traitorously and unarmed."

    "As heaven is my help," replied Sir Lancelot, "I did it ignorantly, for I
    loved them well, and while I live I shall bewail their death; but to make
    war with me were no avail, for I must needs fight with thee if thou
    assailest, and peradventure I might kill thee also, which I were right
    loth to do."

    "I will forgive thee never," cried Sir Gawain, "and if the king accordeth
    with thee he shall lose my service."

    Then the knights who stood near tried to reconcile Sir Gawain to Sir
    Lancelot, but he would not hear them. So, at the last, Sir Lancelot said,
    "Since peace is vain, I will depart, lest I bring more evil on my
    fellowship."

    And as he turned to go, the tears fell from him, and he said, "Alas, most
    noble Christian realm, which I have loved above all others, now shall I
    see thee never more!" Then said he to the queen, "Madam, now must I leave
    ye and this noble fellowship for ever. And, I beseech ye, pray for me, and
    if ye ever be defamed of any, let me hear thereof, and as I have been ever
    thy true knight in right and wrong, so will I be again."

    With that he kneeled and kissed King Arthur's hands, and departed on his
    way. And there was none in all that court, save Sir Gawain alone, but wept
    to see him go.

    So he returned with all his knights to the Castle of La Joyous Garde, and,
    for his sorrow's sake, he named it Dolorous Garde thenceforth.

    Anon he left the realm, and went with many of his fellowship beyond the
    sea to France, and there divided all his lands among them equally, he
    sharing but as the rest.

    And from that time forward peace had been between him and King Arthur, but
    for Sir Gawain, who left the king no rest, but constantly persuaded him
    that Lancelot was raising mighty hosts against him.

    So in the end his malice overcame the king, who left the government in
    charge of Modred, and made him guardian of the queen, and went with a
    great army to invade Sir Lancelot's lands.

    Yet Sir Lancelot would make no war upon the king, and sent a message to
    gain peace on any terms King Arthur chose. But Sir Gawain met the herald
    ere he reached the king, and sent him back with taunting and bitter words.
    Whereat Sir Lancelot sorrowfully called his knights together and fortified
    the Castle of Benwicke, and there was shortly besieged by the army of King
    Arthur.

    And every day Sir Gawain rode up to the walls, and cried out foully on Sir
    Lancelot, till, upon a time, Sir Lancelot answered him that he would meet
    him in the field and put his boasting to the proof. So it was agreed on
    both sides that there should none come nigh them or separate them till one
    had fallen or yielded; and they two rode forth.

    Then did they wheel their horses apart, and turning, came together as it
    had been thunder, so that both horses fell, and both their lances broke.
    At that they drew their swords and set upon each other fiercely, with
    passing grievous strokes.

    Now Sir Gawain had through magic a marvellous great gift. For every day,
    from morning till noon, his strength waxed to the might of seven men, but
    after that waned to his natural force. Therefore till noon he gave Sir
    Lancelot many mighty buffets, which scarcely he endured. Yet greatly he
    forbore Sir Gawain, for he was aware of his enchantment, and smote him
    slightly till his own knights marvelled. But after noon Sir Gawain's
    strength sank fast, and then, with one full blow, Sir Lancelot laid him on
    the earth. Then Sir Gawain cried out, "Turn not away, thou traitor knight,
     but slay me if thou wilt, or else I will arise and fight with thee again
    some other time."

    "Sir knight," replied Sir Lancelot, "I never yet smote a fallen man."

    At that they bore Sir Gawain sorely wounded to his tent, and King Arthur
    withdrew his men, for he was loth to shed the blood of so many knights of
    his own fellowship.

    But now came tidings to King Arthur from across the sea, which caused him
    to return in haste. For thus the news ran, that no sooner was Sir Modred
    set up in his regency, than he had forged false tidings from abroad that
    the king had fallen in a battle with Sir Lancelot. Whereat he had
    proclaimed himself the king, and had been crowned at Canterbury, where he
    had held a coronation feast for fifteen days. Then he had gone to
    Winchester, where Queen Guinevere abode, and had commanded her to be his
    wife; whereto, for fear and sore perplexity, she had feigned consent, but,
    under pretext of preparing for the marriage, had fled in haste to London
    and taken shelter in the Tower, fortifying it and providing it with all
    manner of victuals, and defending it against Sir Modred, and answering to
    all his threats that she would rather slay herself than be his queen.

    Thus was it written to King Arthur. Then, in passing great wrath and
    haste, he came with all his army swiftly back from France and sailed to
    England. But when Sir Modred heard thereof, he left the Tower and marched
    with all his host to meet the king at Dover.

    Then fled Queen Guinevere to Amesbury to a nunnery, and there she clothed
    herself in sackcloth, and spent her time in praying for the king and in
    good deeds and fasting. And in that nunnery evermore she lived, sorely
    repenting and mourning for her sin, and for the ruin she had brought on
    all the realm. And there anon she died.

    And when Sir Lancelot heard thereof, he put his knightly armour off, and
    bade farewell to all his kin, and went a mighty pilgrimage for many years,
    and after lived a hermit till his death.

    When Sir Modred came to Dover, he found King Arthur and his army but just
    landed; and there they fought a fierce and bloody battle, and many great
    and noble knights fell on both sides.

    But the king's side had the victory, for he was beyond himself with might
    and passion, and all his knights so fiercely followed him, that, in spite
    of all their multitude, they drove Sir Modred's army back with fearful
    wounds and slaughter, and slept that night upon the battle-field.

    But Sir Gawain was smitten by an arrow in the wound Sir Lancelot gave him,
    and wounded to the death. Then was he borne to the king's tent, and King
    Arthur sorrowed over him as it had been his own son. "Alas!" said he; "in
    Sir Lancelot and in you I had my greatest earthly joy, and now is all gone
    from me."

    And Sir Gawain answered, with a feeble voice, "My lord and king, I know
    well my death is come, and through my own wilfulness, for I am smitten in
    the wound Sir Lancelot gave me. Alas! that I have been the cause of all
    this war, for but for me thou hadst been now at peace with Lancelot, and
    then had Modred never done this treason. I pray ye, therefore, my dear
    lord, be now agreed with Lancelot, and tell him, that although he gave me
    my death-wound, it was through my own seeking; wherefore I beseech him to
    come back to England, and here to visit my tomb, and pray for my soul."

    When he had thus spoken, Sir Gawain gave up his ghost, and the king
    grievously mourned for him.

    Then they told him that the enemy had camped on Barham Downs, whereat,
    with all his hosts, he straightway marched there, and fought again a
    bloody battle, and overthrew Sir Modred utterly. Howbeit, he raised yet
    another army, and retreating ever from before the king, increased his
    numbers as he went, till at the farthest west in Lyonesse, he once more
    made a stand.

    Now, on the night of Trinity Sunday, being the eve of the battle, King
    Arthur had a vision, and saw Sir Gawain in a dream, who warned him not to
    fight with Modred on the morrow, else he would be surely slain; and prayed
    him to delay till Lancelot and his knights should come to aid him.

    So when King Arthur woke he told his lords and knights that vision, and
    all agreed to wait the coming of Sir Lancelot. Then a herald was sent with
    a message of truce to Sir Modred, and a treaty was made that neither army
    should assail the other.

    But when the treaty was agreed upon, and the heralds returned, King Arthur
    said to his knights, "Beware, lest Sir Modred deceive us, for I in no wise
    trust him, and if swords be drawn be ready to encounter!" And Sir Modred
    likewise gave an order, that if any man of the king's army drew his sword,
    they should begin to fight.

    And as it chanced, a knight of the king's side was bitten by an adder in
    the foot, and hastily drew forth his sword to slay it. That saw Sir
    Modred, and forthwith commanded all his army to assail the king's.

    So both sides rushed to battle, and fought passing fiercely. And when the
    king saw there was no hope to stay them, he did right mightily and nobly
    as a king should do, and ever, like a lion, raged in the thickest of the
    press, and slew on the right hand and on the left, till his horse went
    fetlock deep in blood. So all day long they fought, and stinted not till
    many a noble knight was slain.

    But the king was passing sorrowful to see his trusty knights lie dead on
    every side. And at the last but two remained beside him, Sir Lucan, and
    his brother, Sir Bedivere, and both were sorely wounded.

    "Now am I come to mine end," said King Arthur; "but, lo! that traitor
    Modred liveth yet, and I may not die till I have slain him. Now, give me
    my spear, Sir Lucan."

    "Lord, let him be," replied Sir Lucan; "for if ye pass through this
    unhappy day, ye shall be right well revenged upon him. My good lord,
    remember well your dream, and what the spirit of Sir Gawain did forewarn
    ye."

    "Betide me life, betide me death," said the king; "now I see him yonder
    alone, he shall never escape my hands, for at a better vantage shall I
    never have him."

    "God speed you well," said Sir Bedivere.

    Then King Arthur got his spear in both his hands, and ran towards Sir
    Modred, crying, "Traitor, now is thy death-day come!" And when Sir Modred
    heard his words, and saw him come, he drew his sword and stood to meet
    him. Then King Arthur smote Sir Modred through the body more than a
    fathom. And when Sir Modred felt he had his death wound, he thrust himself
    with all his might up to the end of King Arthur's spear, and smote his
    father, Arthur, with his sword upon the head, so that it pierced both helm
    and brain-pan.

    And therewith Sir Modred fell down stark dead to the earth, and King
    Arthur fell down also in a swoon, and swooned many times.

    Then Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere came and bare him away to a little chapel
    by the sea-shore. And there Sir Lucan sank down with the bleeding of his
    own wounds, and fell dead.

    And King Arthur lay long in a swoon, and when he came to himself, he found
    Sir Lucan lying dead beside him, and Sir Bedivere weeping over the body of
    his brother.

    Then said the king to Sir Bedivere, "Weeping will avail no longer, else
    would I grieve for evermore. Alas! now is the fellowship of the Round
    Table dissolved for ever, and all my realm I have so loved is wasted with
    war. But my time hieth fast, wherefore take thou Excalibur, my good sword,
    and go therewith to yonder water-side and throw it in, and bring me word
    what thing thou seest."

    So Sir Bedivere departed; but as he went he looked upon the sword, the
    hilt whereof was all inlaid with precious stones exceeding rich. And
    presently he said within himself, "If I now throw this sword into the
    water, what good should come of it?" So he hid the sword among the reeds,
    and came again to the king.

    "What sawest thou?" said he to Sir Bedivere.

    "Lord," said he, "I saw nothing else but wind and waves."

    "Thou hast untruly spoken," said the king; "wherefore go lightly back and
    throw it in, and spare not."

    Then Sir Bedivere returned again, and took the sword up in his hand; but
    when he looked on it, he thought it sin and shame to throw away a thing so
    noble. Wherefore he hid it yet again, and went back to the king.

    "What saw ye?" said King Arthur.

    "Lord," answered he, "I saw nothing but the water ebbing and flowing."

    "Oh, traitor and untrue!" cried out the king; "twice hast thou now
    betrayed me. Art thou called of men a noble knight, and wouldest betray me
    for a jewelled sword? Now, therefore, go again for the last time, for thy
    tarrying hath put me in sore peril of my life, and I fear my wound hath
    taken cold; and if thou do it not this time, by my faith I will arise and
    slay thee with my hands."

    Then Sir Bedivere ran quickly and took up the sword, and went down to the
    water's edge, and bound the girdle round the hilt and threw it far into
    the water. And lo! an arm and hand came forth above the water, and caught
    the sword, and brandished it three times, and vanished.

    So Sir Bedivere came again to the king and told him what he had seen.

    "Help me from hence," said King Arthur; "for I dread me I have tarried
    over long."

    Then Sir Bedivere took the king up in his arms, and bore him to the
    water's edge. And by the shore they saw a barge with three fair queens
    therein, all dressed in black, and when they saw King Arthur they wept and
    wailed.

    "Now put me in the barge," said he to Sir Bedivere, and tenderly he did
    so.

    Then the three queens received him, and he laid his head upon the lap of
    one of them, who cried, "Alas! dear brother, why have ye tarried so long,
    for your wound hath taken cold?"

    With that the barge put from the land, and when Sir Bedivere saw it
    departing, he cried with a bitter cry, "Alas! my lord King Arthur, what
    shall become of me now ye have gone from me?"

    "Comfort ye," said King Arthur, "and be strong, for I may no more help ye.
    I go to the Vale of Avilion to heal me of my grievous wound, and if ye see
    me no more, pray for my soul."

    Then the three queens kneeled down around the king and sorely wept and
    wailed, and the barge went forth to sea, and departed slowly out of Sir
    Bedivere's sight.
  </content>
</note>
CREATE
<note>
  <guid>11353ACB-A1AD-4FBC-A9FD-B294315256F6</guid>
  <created>2014-02-17T21:42:29Z</created>
  <tag>fiction</tag>
  <tag>novel</tag>
  <tag>twain</tag>
  <tag>clemens</tag>
  <tag>arthur</tag>
  <tag>knight</tag>
  <tag>king</tag>
  <content>
    A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT

    by

    MARK TWAIN
    (Samuel L. Clemens)




    PREFACE

    The ungentle laws and customs touched upon in this tale are
    historical, and the episodes which are used to illustrate them
    are also historical.  It is not pretended that these laws and
    customs existed in England in the sixth century; no, it is only
    pretended that inasmuch as they existed in the English and other
    civilizations of far later times, it is safe to consider that it is
    no libel upon the sixth century to suppose them to have been in
    practice in that day also.  One is quite justified in inferring
    that whatever one of these laws or customs was lacking in that
    remote time, its place was competently filled by a worse one.

    The question as to whether there is such a thing as divine right
    of kings is not settled in this book.  It was found too difficult.
    That the executive head of a nation should be a person of lofty
    character and extraordinary ability, was manifest and indisputable;
    that none but the Deity could select that head unerringly, was
    also manifest and indisputable; that the Deity ought to make that
    selection, then, was likewise manifest and indisputable; consequently,
    that He does make it, as claimed, was an unavoidable deduction.
    I mean, until the author of this book encountered the Pompadour,
    and Lady Castlemaine, and some other executive heads of that kind;
    these were found so difficult to work into the scheme, that it
    was judged better to take the other tack in this book (which
    must be issued this fall), and then go into training and settle
    the question in another book.  It is, of course, a thing which
    ought to be settled, and I am not going to have anything particular
    to do next winter anyway.

    MARK TWAIN

    HARTFORD, July 21, 1889






    A CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT




    A WORD OF EXPLANATION

    It was in Warwick Castle that I came across the curious stranger
    whom I am going to talk about.  He attracted me by three things:
    his candid simplicity, his marvelous familiarity with ancient armor,
    and the restfulness of his company - for he did all the talking.
    We fell together, as modest people will, in the tail of the herd
    that was being shown through, and he at once began to say things
    which interested me.  As he talked along, softly, pleasantly,
    flowingly, he seemed to drift away imperceptibly out of this world
    and time, and into some remote era and old forgotten country;
    and so he gradually wove such a spell about me that I seemed
    to move among the specters and shadows and dust and mold of a gray
    antiquity, holding speech with a relic of it!  Exactly as I would
    speak of my nearest personal friends or enemies, or my most familiar
    neighbors, he spoke of Sir Bedivere, Sir Bors de Ganis, Sir Launcelot
    of the Lake, Sir Galahad, and all the other great names of the
    Table Round - and how old, old, unspeakably old and faded and dry
    and musty and ancient he came to look as he went on!  Presently
    he turned to me and said, just as one might speak of the weather,
    or any other common matter -

    "You know about transmigration of souls; do you know about
    transposition of epochs - and bodies?"

    I said I had not heard of it.  He was so little interested - just
    as when people speak of the weather - that he did not notice
    whether I made him any answer or not. There was half a moment
    of silence, immediately interrupted by the droning voice of the
    salaried cicerone:

    "Ancient hauberk, date of the sixth century, time of King Arthur
    and the Round Table; said to have belonged to the knight Sir Sagramor
    le Desirous; observe the round hole through the chain-mail in
    the left breast; can't be accounted for; supposed to have been
    done with a bullet since invention of firearms - perhaps maliciously
    by Cromwell's soldiers."

    My acquaintance smiled - not a modern smile, but one that must
    have gone out of general use many, many centuries ago - and muttered
    apparently to himself:

    "Wit ye well, _I saw it done_."  Then, after a pause, added:
    "I did it myself."

    By the time I had recovered from the electric surprise of this
    remark, he was gone.

    All that evening I sat by my fire at the Warwick Arms, steeped
    in a dream of the olden time, while the rain beat upon the windows,
    and the wind roared about the eaves and corners.  From time to
    time I dipped into old Sir Thomas Malory's enchanting book, and
    fed at its rich feast of prodigies and adventures, breathed in
    the fragrance of its obsolete names, and dreamed again.  Midnight
    being come at length, I read another tale, for a nightcap - this
    which here follows, to wit:

    HOW SIR LAUNCELOT SLEW TWO GIANTS, AND MADE A CASTLE FREE

       Anon withal came there upon him two great giants,
       well armed, all save the heads, with two horrible
       clubs in their hands.  Sir Launcelot put his shield
       afore him, and put the stroke away of the one
       giant, and with his sword he clave his head asunder.
       When his fellow saw that, he ran away as he were
       wood [*demented], for fear of the horrible strokes,
       and Sir Launcelot after him with all his might,
       and smote him on the shoulder, and clave him to
       the middle.  Then Sir Launcelot went into the hall,
       and there came afore him three score ladies and
       damsels, and all kneeled unto him, and thanked
       God and him of their deliverance.  For, sir, said
       they, the most part of us have been here this
       seven year their prisoners, and we have worked all
       manner of silk works for our meat, and we are all
       great gentle-women born, and blessed be the time,
       knight, that ever thou wert born; for thou hast
       done the most worship that ever did knight in the
       world, that will we bear record, and we all pray
       you to tell us your name, that we may tell our
       friends who delivered us out of prison.  Fair
       damsels, he said, my name is Sir Launcelot du
       Lake.  And so he departed from them and betaught
       them unto God.  And then he mounted upon his
       horse, and rode into many strange and wild
       countries, and through many waters and valleys,
       and evil was he lodged.  And at the last by
       fortune him happened against a night to come to
       a fair courtilage, and therein he found an old
       gentle-woman that lodged him with a good-will,
       and there he had good cheer for him and his horse.
       And when time was, his host brought him into a
       fair garret over the gate to his bed. There
       Sir Launcelot unarmed him, and set his harness
       by him, and went to bed, and anon he fell on
       sleep. So, soon after there came one on
       horseback, and knocked at the gate in great
       haste.  And when Sir Launcelot heard this he rose
       up, and looked out at the window, and saw by the
       moonlight three knights come riding after that
       one man, and all three lashed on him at once
       with swords, and that one knight turned on them
       knightly again and defended him. Truly, said
       Sir Launcelot, yonder one knight shall I help,
       for it were shame for me to see three knights
       on one, and if he be slain I am partner of his
       death.  And therewith he took his harness and
       went out at a window by a sheet down to the four
       knights, and then Sir Launcelot said on high,
       Turn you knights unto me, and leave your
       fighting with that knight. And then they all
       three left Sir Kay, and turned unto Sir Launcelot,
       and there began great battle, for they alight
       all three, and strake many strokes at Sir
       Launcelot, and assailed him on every side. Then
       Sir Kay dressed him for to have holpen Sir
       Launcelot.  Nay, sir, said he, I will none of
       your help, therefore as ye will have my help
       let me alone with them.  Sir Kay for the pleasure
       of the knight suffered him for to do his will,
       and so stood aside. And then anon within six
       strokes Sir Launcelot had stricken them to the earth.

       And then they all three cried, Sir Knight, we
       yield us unto you as man of might matchless.  As
       to that, said Sir Launcelot, I will not take
       your yielding unto me, but so that ye yield
       you unto Sir Kay the seneschal, on that covenant
       I will save your lives and else not.  Fair knight,
       said they, that were we loath to do; for as for
       Sir Kay we chased him hither, and had overcome
       him had ye not been; therefore, to yield us unto
       him it were no reason.  Well, as to that, said
       Sir Launcelot, advise you well, for ye may
       choose whether ye will die or live, for an ye be
       yielden, it shall be unto Sir Kay.  Fair knight,
       then they said, in saving our lives we will do
       as thou commandest us.  Then shall ye, said Sir
       Launcelot, on Whitsunday next coming go unto the
       court of King Arthur, and there shall ye yield
       you unto Queen Guenever, and put you all three
       in her grace and mercy, and say that Sir Kay
       sent you thither to be her prisoners.  On the morn
       Sir Launcelot arose early, and left Sir Kay
       sleeping; and Sir Launcelot took Sir Kay's armor
       and his shield and armed him, and so he went to
       the stable and took his horse, and took his leave
       of his host, and so he departed.  Then soon after
       arose Sir Kay and missed Sir Launcelot; and
       then he espied that he had his armor and his
       horse. Now by my faith I know well that he will
       grieve some of the court of King Arthur; for on
       him knights will be bold, and deem that it is I,
       and that will beguile them; and because of his
       armor and shield I am sure I shall ride in peace.
       And then soon after departed Sir Kay, and
       thanked his host.


    As I laid the book down there was a knock at the door, and my
    stranger came in.  I gave him a pipe and a chair, and made him
    welcome.  I also comforted him with a hot Scotch whisky; gave him
    another one; then still another - hoping always for his story.
    After a fourth persuader, he drifted into it himself, in a quite
    simple and natural way:



    THE STRANGER'S HISTORY

    I am an American.  I was born and reared in Hartford, in the State
    of Connecticut - anyway, just over the river, in the country.  So
    I am a Yankee of the Yankees - and practical; yes, and nearly
    barren of sentiment, I suppose - or poetry, in other words.  My
    father was a blacksmith, my uncle was a horse doctor, and I was
    both, along at first.  Then I went over to the great arms factory
    and learned my real trade; learned all there was to it; learned
    to make everything: guns, revolvers, cannon, boilers, engines, all
    sorts of labor-saving machinery.  Why, I could make anything
    a body wanted - anything in the world, it didn't make any difference
    what; and if there wasn't any quick new-fangled way to make a thing,
    I could invent one - and do it as easy as rolling off a log.  I became
    head superintendent; had a couple of thousand men under me.

    Well, a man like that is a man that is full of fight - that goes
    without saying.  With a couple of thousand rough men under one,
    one has plenty of that sort of amusement.  I had, anyway.  At last
    I met my match, and I got my dose.  It was during a misunderstanding
    conducted with crowbars with a fellow we used to call Hercules.
    He laid me out with a crusher alongside the head that made everything
    crack, and seemed to spring every joint in my skull and made it
    overlap its neighbor.  Then the world went out in darkness, and
    I didn't feel anything more, and didn't know anything at all
     - at least for a while.

    When I came to again, I was sitting under an oak tree, on the
    grass, with a whole beautiful and broad country landscape all
    to myself - nearly.  Not entirely; for there was a fellow on a horse,
    looking down at me - a fellow fresh out of a picture-book.  He was
    in old-time iron armor from head to heel, with a helmet on his
    head the shape of a nail-keg with slits in it; and he had a shield,
    and a sword, and a prodigious spear; and his horse had armor on,
    too, and a steel horn projecting from his forehead, and gorgeous
    red and green silk trappings that hung down all around him like
    a bedquilt, nearly to the ground.

    "Fair sir, will ye just?" said this fellow.

    "Will I which?"

    "Will ye try a passage of arms for land or lady or for - "

    "What are you giving me?" I said.  "Get along back to your circus,
    or I'll report you."

    Now what does this man do but fall back a couple of hundred yards
    and then come rushing at me as hard as he could tear, with his
    nail-keg bent down nearly to his horse's neck and his long spear
    pointed straight ahead.  I saw he meant business, so I was up
    the tree when he arrived.

    He allowed that I was his property, the captive of his spear.
    There was argument on his side - and the bulk of the advantage
     - so I judged it best to humor him.  We fixed up an agreement
    whereby I was to go with him and he was not to hurt me.  I came
    down, and we started away, I walking by the side of his horse.
    We marched comfortably along, through glades and over brooks which
    I could not remember to have seen before - which puzzled me and
    made me wonder - and yet we did not come to any circus or sign of
    a circus.  So I gave up the idea of a circus, and concluded he was
    from an asylum.  But we never came to an asylum - so I was up
    a stump, as you may say.  I asked him how far we were from Hartford.
    He said he had never heard of the place; which I took to be a lie,
    but allowed it to go at that.  At the end of an hour we saw a
    far-away town sleeping in a valley by a winding river; and beyond
    it on a hill, a vast gray fortress, with towers and turrets,
    the first I had ever seen out of a picture.

    "Bridgeport?" said I, pointing.

    "Camelot," said he.


    My stranger had been showing signs of sleepiness.  He caught
    himself nodding, now, and smiled one of those pathetic, obsolete
    smiles of his, and said:

    "I find I can't go on; but come with me, I've got it all written
    out, and you can read it if you like."

    In his chamber, he said: "First, I kept a journal; then by and by,
    after years, I took the journal and turned it into a book. How
    long ago that was!"

    He handed me his manuscript, and pointed out the place where
    I should begin:

    "Begin here - I've already told you what goes before."  He was
    steeped in drowsiness by this time.  As I went out at his door
    I heard him murmur sleepily: "Give you good den, fair sir."

    I sat down by my fire and examined my treasure.  The first part
    of it - the great bulk of it - was parchment, and yellow with age.
    I scanned a leaf particularly and saw that it was a palimpsest.
    Under the old dim writing of the Yankee historian appeared traces
    of a penmanship which was older and dimmer still - Latin words
    and sentences: fragments from old monkish legends, evidently.
    I turned to the place indicated by my stranger and began to read
     - as follows:




    THE TALE OF THE LOST LAND




    CHAPTER I

    CAMELOT

    "Camelot - Camelot," said I to myself.  "I don't seem to remember
    hearing of it before.  Name of the asylum, likely."

    It was a soft, reposeful summer landscape, as lovely as a dream,
    and as lonesome as Sunday.  The air was full of the smell of
    flowers, and the buzzing of insects, and the twittering of birds,
    and there were no people, no wagons, there was no stir of life,
    nothing going on.  The road was mainly a winding path with hoof-prints
    in it, and now and then a faint trace of wheels on either side in
    the grass - wheels that apparently had a tire as broad as one's hand.

    Presently a fair slip of a girl, about ten years old, with a cataract
    of golden hair streaming down over her shoulders, came along.
    Around her head she wore a hoop of flame-red poppies. It was as
    sweet an outfit as ever I saw, what there was of it.  She walked
    indolently along, with a mind at rest, its peace reflected in her
    innocent face.  The circus man paid no attention to her; didn't
    even seem to see her.  And she - she was no more startled at his
    fantastic make-up than if she was used to his like every day of
    her life.  She was going by as indifferently as she might have gone
    by a couple of cows; but when she happened to notice me, _then_
    there was a change!  Up went her hands, and she was turned to stone;
    her mouth dropped open, her eyes stared wide and timorously, she
    was the picture of astonished curiosity touched with fear.  And
    there she stood gazing, in a sort of stupefied fascination, till
    we turned a corner of the wood and were lost to her view.  That
    she should be startled at me instead of at the other man, was too
    many for me; I couldn't make head or tail of it.  And that she
    should seem to consider me a spectacle, and totally overlook her
    own merits in that respect, was another puzzling thing, and a
    display of magnanimity, too, that was surprising in one so young.
    There was food for thought here.  I moved along as one in a dream.

    As we approached the town, signs of life began to appear.  At
    intervals we passed a wretched cabin, with a thatched roof, and
    about it small fields and garden patches in an indifferent state of
    cultivation.  There were people, too; brawny men, with long, coarse,
    uncombed hair that hung down over their faces and made them look
    like animals.  They and the women, as a rule, wore a coarse
    tow-linen robe that came well below the knee, and a rude sort of
    sandal, and many wore an iron collar.  The small boys and girls
    were always naked; but nobody seemed to know it.  All of these
    people stared at me, talked about me, ran into the huts and fetched
    out their families to gape at me; but nobody ever noticed that
    other fellow, except to make him humble salutation and get no
    response for their pains.

    In the town were some substantial windowless houses of stone
    scattered among a wilderness of thatched cabins; the streets were
    mere crooked alleys, and unpaved; troops of dogs and nude children
    played in the sun and made life and noise; hogs roamed and rooted
    contentedly about, and one of them lay in a reeking wallow in
    the middle of the main thoroughfare and suckled her family.
    Presently there was a distant blare of military music; it came
    nearer, still nearer, and soon a noble cavalcade wound into view,
    glorious with plumed helmets and flashing mail and flaunting banners
    and rich doublets and horse-cloths and gilded spearheads; and
    through the muck and swine, and naked brats, and joyous dogs, and
    shabby huts, it took its gallant way, and in its wake we followed.
    Followed through one winding alley and then another, - and climbing,
    always climbing - till at last we gained the breezy height where
    the huge castle stood.  There was an exchange of bugle blasts;
    then a parley from the walls, where men-at-arms, in hauberk and
    morion, marched back and forth with halberd at shoulder under
    flapping banners with the rude figure of a dragon displayed upon
    them; and then the great gates were flung open, the drawbridge
    was lowered, and the head of the cavalcade swept forward under
    the frowning arches; and we, following, soon found ourselves in
    a great paved court, with towers and turrets stretching up into
    the blue air on all the four sides; and all about us the dismount
    was going on, and much greeting and ceremony, and running to and
    fro, and a gay display of moving and intermingling colors, and
    an altogether pleasant stir and noise and confusion.



    CHAPTER II

    KING ARTHUR'S COURT

    The moment I got a chance I slipped aside privately and touched
    an ancient common looking man on the shoulder and said, in an
    insinuating, confidential way:

    "Friend, do me a kindness.  Do you belong to the asylum, or are
    you just on a visit or something like that?"

    He looked me over stupidly, and said:

    "Marry, fair sir, me seemeth - "

    "That will do," I said; "I reckon you are a patient."

    I moved away, cogitating, and at the same time keeping an eye
    out for any chance passenger in his right mind that might come
    along and give me some light.  I judged I had found one, presently;
    so I drew him aside and said in his ear:

    "If I could see the head keeper a minute - only just a minute - "

    "Prithee do not let me."

    "Let you _what_?"

    "_Hinder_ me, then, if the word please thee better.  Then he went
    on to say he was an under-cook and could not stop to gossip,
    though he would like it another time; for it would comfort his
    very liver to know where I got my clothes.  As he started away he
    pointed and said yonder was one who was idle enough for my purpose,
    and was seeking me besides, no doubt.  This was an airy slim boy
    in shri
